Community Identity: 

Peer Prestige and Academic Hiring in the iSchoolsAndrea Wiggins

Syracuse University

School of Information Studies 

337 Hinds Hall

Syracuse, NY 13244-4100

1-315-558-0122

awiggins@syr.edu

Michael J. McQuaid

University of Michigan

School of Information

1085 S. University Ave 

Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1107

1-734-647-9550

mcq@umich.edu

Lada A. Adamic

University of Michigan

School of Information

1085 S. University Ave.

Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1107

1-734-615-2132

ladamic@umich.edu

ABSTRACT

Exploring indicators of prestige in hiring networks as they relate to
measures of prestige presented in peer ratings provides a new
perspective on hiring and identity in the iSchools. This study examines
a hiring network for the iSchool community and finds that the perception
of prestige among iSchools, as represented by the US News & World Report
(USNWR) graduate school ratings, may be improved by hiring choices that
strengthen connections within the iSchool community, balanced by
increasing the diversity of sources for new faculty. We compare the
academic hiring network for the more establish Computer Science
discipline to the recently emergent iSchools to explore the relationship
between peer prestige and community identity. We also discuss additional
observations from the data relating to the interdisciplinary diversity
of the iSchool community.

Topics

	Nature and scope of iSchools and iResearch

Keywords

iSchools, identity, peer prestige, hiring networks, academic hiring,
diversity, social network analysis.

INTRODUCTION

Prestige ratings are a commonly consulted indicator of image and
identity [1]; for a community in which identity is a matter of concern,
inclusive prestige scores can position each school in a community
context. Prestige ratings based on peer survey responses, published by
such groups as USNWR and the National Research Council (NRC), imply a
hierarchy of quality and prestige in the institutions reviewed [2, 3].
One target audience for the ratings is college-bound students, and as
such the ratings project an important aspect of identity with respect to
student recruitment. This gives us reason to question the value of the
survey responses as indicators of academic program quality for the
interdisciplinary iSchools, particularly because existing ratings such
as the prevalent prestige ratings for library and information science
(LIS) from USNWR do not include the entire community.

Copyright and Disclaimer Information

The copyright of this document remains with the authors and/or their
institutions. By submitting their papers to the iSchools Conference 2008
web site, the authors hereby grant a license for the iSchools to post
and disseminate their papers on this site and on a CD. Contact the
authors directly for any use outside of downloading and referencing this
paper. Neither the iSchools nor any of its associated universities
endorse this work. The authors are solely responsible for their
paper’s content. Our thanks to the Association for Computing Machinery
for permission to adapt and use their template for the iSchools 2008
Conference. 

We begin with a brief review of the literature related to identity,
prestige, and hiring in academia. We then discuss the methods we used to
examine the relationship between prestige, as a proxy for identity
within a community, and the exchange of social capital represented by
academic hiring. We provide a descriptive comparison of the hiring
networks for top-ranked Computer Science (CS) departments and the
iSchools, and present the results of regression analysis on prestige
ratings for each network. We also examine additional aspects of the
iSchool community based on the composition of faculty, specifically the
phenomenon of self-hiring and the diversity of disciplines represented
by the faculty of the iSchools.

LITERATURE REVIEW

Growing interest in the formation of community identity in iSchools
inspired conference papers on this theme at the 2005 iConference; some
concerns included student recruitment and student placement, which are
particularly challenging for a new academic discipline and are critical
to the ongoing success of the iSchools [4, 5]. Identity is a clear root
factor in these challenges, as a lack of awareness of the iSchool
movement hinders student recruitment efforts, and program graduates must
be able to clearly articulate the identity and value of their
interdisciplinary studies to secure employment. Further challenges
identified at the 2005 iConference pertain to the development of the
scholarly community from the perspectives of publication, funding, and
interdisciplinary research efforts [6]. In other recently established
disciplines such as African-American studies, and professional fields
such as MIS, concerns over organizational and disciplinary legitimacy
play a strong role in the development of disciplinary identity [7, 8].

In academia, departmental prestige is often considered a reflection of
identity. A variety of studies of academic prestige in the social
sciences have shown that departmental prestige is related to faculty
hiring practices [9-12]. When hiring is based on criteria such as
prestige instead of more merit-based criteria, such as scholarly
productivity, researcher are concerned about potentially detrimental
effects to the field in the form of academic inbreeding and greater
stratification of prestige [13, 14]. These prior studies of academic
hiring have repeatedly shown PhD program prestige to be much more
relevant to post-PhD job placement prestige than scholarly productivity
at the time of graduation, and while scholarly productivity has little
influence on hiring, hiring has a strong effect on scholarly
productivity [15, 16].

Evaluating faculty productivity for the iSchools proves difficult due to
the interdisciplinarity of the community, particularly for comparison to
prestige, as there are currently no ratings that are inclusive of the
entire community. Although LIS research faculty productivity has
previously been measured through publication and citation rates [17],
increasing departmental interdisciplinarity and incompleteness of
databases poses significant challenges to the validity of LIS faculty
productivity studies [18]. In addition, evaluating LIS schools alone
would exclude several iSchools that are not accredited by the ALA, and
evaluating the iSchools based only on their LIS programs would not
appropriately represent the breadth of the relevant faculty expertise.
Accounting for the variations across iSchools that is introduced by
their interdisciplinarity will remain a challenge in any attempt to rank
these schools based on scholarly productivity.

METHODS

This study evaluates whether network measures of centrality can predict
the peer survey prestige ratings that are a part of the community
context of identity in an academic discipline. A network data set
representing faculty hiring in the iSchools was generated through manual
data collection. While this data would traditionally be collected
through a survey of faculty, or from a directory that aggregates faculty
survey data by department or academic field, either of these methods
would be subject to an unacceptable level of bias due to inaccuracies
and omissions. For this reason, the sampling frame was compiled from
faculty rosters on institutional web sites, which are updated more
frequently than published directories, and are considered the most
authoritative public source for this information [17, 19].

Data Collection

The data set collected in January 2007 documents the educational
pedigrees of the full-time professorial faculty members at iSchools.
Faculty roles are variously defined among different schools, and roles
such as lecturer or associate in information studies are not necessarily
representative of the long-term intellectual investment in academic
identity that the hiring network seeks to represent. In addition,
Professors emeritae are more representative of the prior identity states
of a school than its current state. We identified full-time professorial
faculty by the standard academic titles of professor, associate
professor, assistant professor, associate dean and dean. The data were
collected from iSchool web sites, faculty web sites and CVs, and the UMI
Dissertation Abstracts database. For each faculty member who could be
identified at the time of data collection as meeting the job title
criterion, the data collected included their graduate institution and
faculty title, the year of their PhD, and the department or school
granting the PhD. To address potential validity problems arising from
data incompleteness in a relatively small population, the manual data
collection took the form of a faculty census with a 100% response rate,
yielding 693 terminal degrees held by 687 academics. After adjustments
to maintain the PhD degree as the unit of analysis, a total of 674 data
points remained. 

A similar data set of hiring in top-ranked Computer Science (CS)
departments was used to compare the findings for iSchools to a more
established academic discipline. Collected in 2005, these data provide
the sources of PhD degrees granted to the faculty of 29 computer science
and electrical engineering departments, summarizing 1121 faculty PhDs in
527 edges between 123 schools. The departments selected as egos for data
collection in this network were the top-ranked 26 programs in the United
States and three top Canadian institutions. Reputation survey ratings
from USNWR and the NRC were also applied to the CS network data set for
analysis of correlations between USNWR ratings and network statistics
[2, 20].

Constructing Hiring Networks 

To examine the relationship between hiring and peer prestige, we
constructed an iSchool hiring network of institutional affiliations by
combining ego networks for each iSchool institution. Ego networks are
constructed based on the set of connections for a focal node, called an
ego; each node directly connected to the ego is known as its alter.
Connections between the schools are based on the institutions from which
current iSchool faculty received their PhD degrees, using the university
as the unit of analysis. Each connection between the schools is a
weighted, directed link; these links are directed from the graduating
institution to the employing institution for each faculty person. The
weights for the links represent the number of academics who share these
graduation and employment affiliations. Constructing the network
unfortunately required merging the two iSchools at Indiana University in
order to maintain the institution as the unit of analysis.

Since both the iSchool and CS networks are constructed in the same way,
by merging ego networks, they are composed of a set of “inside”
nodes for which we have incoming links (information on which other
departments they hired from) and the remainder of the nodes for which
there are no inbound edges. Those “outside” nodes have only outbound
edges, and are included in the dataset if a graduate of the department
was hired by one of the departments sampled. In the iSchool network, the
inside nodes, or egos, are the iSchools and the outside nodes, or
alters, are other institutions that do not have information schools
affiliated with the I-School Caucus. In the computer science network,
the inside nodes are the most highly ranked departments. This method
produces a network with many leaf nodes, representing those schools that
did not provide faculty to more than one inside node, and for which we
did not gather information on current faculty. 

Both the iSchools and CS departments are portions of the larger academic
sphere from which we draw relational information. As ego networks, there
is an inherent bias in these data; while we have complete information
about the relationships between schools that are egos in the networks,
we have incomplete information about those for which we only know that
some of their graduates were hired into the academic units that were
sampled. To compare measures of social and network prestige in these
networks, hiring the graduate of an institution is considered an
endorsement in which patterns of association indicate social exchange.

Measuring Diversity in Hiring Networks

Schools follow varying strategies to build a strong faculty; some are
highly specialized while others are highly interdisciplinary. Two
information entropy calculations provide measures of diversity in hiring
sources and in areas of subject specialization, by applying the
calculation from Shannon [21], -f(log(f), where f is the percentage of
the faculty in a given category, either based on their area of expertise
or the institution from which they received their degrees. When applied
to the hiring data for each school, the hiring diversity measure
reflects both the variety and strength of connections to other schools.
Schools that hire preferentially from a small handful of
highly-respected sources will have low hiring diversity scores and
schools that hire from a wide variety of institutions without strong
favorites will have high diversity scores. The hiring diversity measure
was generated for both networks.

In addition to hiring diversity, an information entropy measure for
disciplinary diversity was calculated for the iSchools. The same
information entropy formula was applied to the percentage of faculty
with degrees in each subject family. The resulting disciplinary
diversity scores are highest for the most interdisciplinary schools and
lowest for schools with a very strong disciplinary focus, as reflected
in the subject areas studied by their faculty.

ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION

The analysis and discussion of the data are presented in several parts.
First, we compare the structures of the iSchool and CS hiring networks,
which are similar with regard to their connectedness but demonstrate
different hiring tendencies in each community. Next, we examine the
relationship between peer prestige and hiring network statistics in both
iSchools and CS departments using regression analysis. We also discuss
the phenomenon of self-hiring in iSchools, and finally, we discuss the
faculty areas of study and the related topic of disciplinary diversity
in the iSchools

Comparing the iSchool and CS Networks

Several global network properties contribute to understanding the
context of the interactions that each hiring network represents. The
size of the network can be evaluated in several ways; the most apparent
measures are the number of nodes and edges, and the ratio of edges to
nodes, which gives the average degree of the nodes in the network. The
networks statistics shown in Table 1 reveal that the iSchools network
has a lower density, lower average degree, lower clustering coefficient,
and lower average edge weight than the CS network. The number of degrees
summarized in each network is the primary reason for this difference.
While the number of egos in each network plays a significant role in
determining these statistics, one notable difference between the two
networks is seen in the ratio of alters to egos. The iSchools have more
than twice as many alters for every ego as do the CS departments,
indicating that the iSchools hire from a greater diversity of sources
than the CS departments. 

Table   SEQ Table \* ARABIC  1 . Network properties for the CS and
iSchool hiring networks.

Network Characteristic	CS Network	iSchools Network

Nodes	123	152

Egos	29	18

Alters	94	134

Ratio of Egos to Alters	3.2	7.4

Edges	572	429

Average Degree	4.7	2.9

Loops	26	17

Total PhD Degrees	1121	674

Average Edge Weight	1.96	1.57

Density	0.038	0.019

Betweenness Centralization	0.21	0.19

Average Distance	2.2	2.3

Diameter	5 (random = 7)	4 (random = 11)

Average Clustering Coefficient	0.23 (random = 0.05)	0.19 

(random = 0.08)



Both the number of egos and the average node degree contribute to the
difference in link density for the networks; the CS network represents
1121 doctoral degrees with more egos and fewer nodes than the iSchool
network, which represents 674 faculty PhDs. The number of edges into
which these degrees are summarized provides another point for
comparison, shown in Table 1 as the average edge weight for the network,
which indicates how strongly the schools in the network are linked. The
difference in average edge weights between the networks may represent a
number of factors, such as the longer tenure of the CS departments,
which has allowed them to build stronger ties within their community
over time. These statistics show that the iSchool network is more
loosely coupled than the CS network, and continues to demonstrate the
difference in hiring diversity between the networks. On average, the
iSchools hire from more than twice as many alters as the CS departments.

We also find that both networks exhibit a low diameter and high
clustering coefficient, shown in comparison to the statistics for
comparable random Erdös-Rényi graphs in Table 1, which are key
characteristics of small world networks [22]. Despite other structural
differences, the two networks are remarkably alike in these small world
characteristics, with very similar average distances, diameters, and
average clustering coefficients. Combined with the comparable
betweenness centralizations, this suggests that the iSchools network is
structurally similar to the CS network in terms of graph connectedness,
even though other aspects of the network structures indicate different
strategies for hiring.

Prestige and USNWR Ratings

Regression on network prestige and centrality measures was applied to
explain the variance in USNWR ratings. Rantings such as those presented
by USNWR and the NRC are considered important as indicators of
institutional identity within the larger academic community context. If
hiring represents a contributing factor the school’s identity, then
the centrality measures for the hiring network may explain some of the
differences in peer prestige perceptions as reported in the surveys that
make up USNWR ratings. In this analysis, the USNWR ratings in LIS were
matched to the iSchools for which they were available. Similarly, the
USNWR ratings and NRC ratings for the CS departments were collected for
the egos of the network.

Peer Prestige Ratings

The USNWR and NRC ratings are based on peer review; both originate from
surveys sent to members of the academic community every few years, in
which respondents provide ratings of perceived quality for the programs
in their discipline. It is reasonable to expect that these data may be
confounded by the respondents' preferences for their own alma maters,
with the potential effect of inflating the prestige ratings for schools
with larger numbers of graduates, simply by virtue of a greater number
of their graduates being positioned to respond to the surveys. 

The 2006 USNWR ratings used in this analysis were based on a 2005 survey
in both CS and LIS, which had respective response rates of 52% and 51%.
The USNWR questionnaires for CS were sent to the department heads and
directors of graduate studies at sampled institutions. For the LIS
survey, questionnaires were sent to deans, program directors, and senior
faculty at 50 schools with ALA-accredited master's programs. The NRC and
USNWR ratings for CS correlated very strongly, so only the USNWR ratings
were used for analysis.

Regression Analysis

 In the CS network, regression on indegree, weighted PageRank, and
betweenness, explained 79% of the variance in USNWR ratings with strong
significance, shown in Table 2. In the iSchools, regression on the
number of graduates of each institution who are now on faculty at
iSchools (output), weighted PageRank, betweenness, and hiring diversity
explained 77% of the variance in USNWR ratings (Table 3). 

Table   SEQ Table \* ARABIC  2 . Regression analysis for the CS Network.

	B	SE B	t

cs-pagerankscore	11.223359	4.294460	  2.613 *

cs-betweenness	0.006258	0.000670	9.340 ***

cs-indegree	-0.068210	0.011898	-5.733 ***

* p < .05, *** p < .001, R2 = .8121, Adj. R2 = .7865,

F(3,22) = 31.7 ***

Table   SEQ Table \* ARABIC  3 . Regression analysis for the iSchool
Network.

	B	SE B	t

lis-betweenness	-0.004923	0.001131	0.00481 **

lis-pagerankscore	12.604780	2.966607	0.00539 **

lis-output	0.053361	0.010957	0.00279 **

lis-hiringentropy	0.574079	0.247805	0.05972 .

. p < .1, ** p < .01, R2 = .8605, Adj. R2 = .7675,

F(4,6) = 9.251 **

Several network measures were significant in explaining the variance in
USNWR ratings, and one variable for each regression proved particularly
interesting. The negative coefficient for indegree from the CS
regression means that a higher indegree has a negative effect on a
school's rating. In effect, the CS departments receive lower ratings if
they choose to hire from a greater number of sources. While hiring
diversity was rejected as a regression coefficient for the CS network,
it was rejected because indegree provided a slightly stronger result,
which can be interpreted as evidence of prestige stratification in the
network. In contrast, adding hiring diversity to the regression analysis
explained an additional 15% of the variance in the iSchool USNWR
ratings. Literally interpreted, this means that hiring faculty more
evenly from a broader range of schools is a practice that is rewarded
with higher prestige ratings in the iSchool network.

The regression results for these two networks reiterate the descriptive
comparison of the network characteristics; while there are some
structural similarities between them, the iSchools and CS departments
differ with respect to the diversity of hiring sources accessed by the
egos of each network. In the context of the academic communities of
computer science and information, the amount of variance explained by
regression and level of confidence are evidence that the hiring in CS
departments forms a social exchange structure that is more cohesive and
predictable than the iSchool community at this point in time. A much
younger discipline, such as the emerging field of information, would not
have the same context for describing itself through a peer evaluation as
a more established discipline such as CS. In the case of the iSchools,
these aggregated peer ratings only evaluate a portion of the community
on a subset of its programs; however, the regression results indicate
that being well connected to the community through diverse hiring
practices improves the peer perception of prestige for iSchools.

Self-Hiring

The data also provide insight into the practice of self-hiring in the
iSchools. Nearly all of the iSchools hire faculty from their own parent
institution. There are at least two reasons for this phenomenon; first,
the faculty may come from other departments within the institution, and
second, the iSchools’ hiring choices for faculty specializing in such
areas as archives and librarianship are more constrained due to the
relatively small number of PhD granting programs in these disciplines. 

In the first case, where faculty are hired from other departments within
the institution, the iSchool network departs significantly from the
social science departments in Burris' study which hired from their own
graduates [11]. Self-hiring in iSchools may in fact represent greater
diversity in the interdisciplinary nature of these hires; Pennsylvania
State University's iSchool was founded recently enough to have none of
its own graduates on faculty, as is also the case for the University of
Washington. At PSU, however, nearly 15% of faculty received their degree
from PSU, where hiring from other departments in the university may
support interdisciplinary diversity within the faculty of the iSchool.
In contrast, Washington's faculty is comprised entirely of graduates of
other institutions with no self-hires whatsoever, making their iSchool
the single exception in the community in this regard.

The iSchools, on average, hired 13% of their faculty from their own
institutions. For the iSchools that had hired faculty with a degree from
their parent institution, approximately 64% of the self-hires were
graduates of the program that now employs them, about 8% of the total
population. In most cases, these are faculty with degrees in library
science, supporting the idea that faculty specialization in this area is
subject to greater hiring constraint. UCLA is an exception in that most
of its self-hires were graduates of its education program, rather than
library science.

Self-hiring is not necessarily a case of a school’s graduates
immediately joining the faculty of the school granting their degrees,
although such a scenario has occurred. It is more likely that a
significant proportion of these individuals had their first tenure-track
employment in academia with another institution and returned to their
alma mater years later.

Faculty Areas of Study

The graduating department or program of study for the faculty of
iSchools was a point of interest for two reasons. First, in the event of
self-loops, where a university has hired its own graduates, we were
interested to know whether these individuals were hired by the same
department from which they had graduated, or from a different school
within the university. A second reason to examine faculty areas of study
is that identity characteristics for each iSchool, such as programs of
study and courses, are both influenced by the areas of expertise
represented on its faculty, and influential to hiring choices. 

Classifying Faculty Degrees

The population of iSchool faculty included 674 PhD degrees in 172
distinct programs of study; these programs were coded according to the
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) and further summarized to
form 13 broad disciplinary categories, shown in Figure 1.

There was some ambiguity regarding how to classify programs entitled
library and information science or information and library science;
these were all coded as library science because there was a substantial
and clearly differentiated population of faculty with degrees in
information science. The initial coding of the faculty areas of study to
CIP families yielded 24 categories; however, some categories such as
family sciences included very few individuals and other categories, such
as engineering and engineering technologies were sufficiently similar as
to provide little additional insight. For analysis purposes, the CIP
categories were compressed into the 13 summary categories presented in
Figure 1.

The majority of the faculty degrees in the population were in computer
and information sciences, making up about 43% of the population. The
next most common area of study, for 14% of the faculty, was library
science. Some portion of those degrees classified in the former category
might arguably have fit into the latter, if consistent detail about the
program of study had been available for faculty with degrees in such
areas as information studies, but data at a level of granularity to
allow discrimination between degree programs were not universally
available. 

As a community, the interdisciplinarity of the field is self-evident,
although the iSchools have varying levels of focus on specific aspects
of the information field, which seems to be a strategy by which schools
differentiate themselves with respect to the community. While permitting
the analysis, coding the faculty degree programs and departments into
CIP families obscures the true diversity of the academic studies in
iSchools, especially within the category of computer and information
sciences. The breadth of the academic traditions represented in the
schools currently granting degrees in information science or information
studies means that the expertise of faculty with degrees in these areas
may be very diverse as well.

Disciplinary Diversity in iSchools

Wile most of the faculty in iSchools studied computer and information
sciences or library science, a full 47% of the faculty members studied
in other fields, bringing great diversity to the iSchool community. We
generated a continuous scale by which to evaluate the interdisciplinary
diversity of faculty expertise at iSchools by using an information
entropy measure based on the number of faculty with degrees from each
disciplinary category [22]. This disciplinary diversity measure clearly
distinguishes between hiring strategies that cultivate interdisciplinary
diversity and strategies that pursue a rich but narrow focus. In terms
of the diversity of faculty expertise, there is significant variation
between schools, as shown in Table 4.

Table 4. Disciplinary diversity is measured using the information
entropy function, converted to Z-scores. 

iSchools, (N = 674)	Disciplinary Diversity

University of Michigan, n = 39	1.38

Syracuse University, n = 33	1.32

Indiana University, n = 87

(both schools together)	1.03

Pennsylvania State University, 

n = 48	0.95

University of Pittsburgh, n = 31	0.91

University of California - Los Angeles, n = 66	0.67

Rutgers University, n = 47	0.67

University of Maryland, n = 17	0.55

Florida State University, n = 25	-0.01

University of California - Berkeley, n = 12	-0.25

University of Washington, n = 29	-0.25

University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign, n = 22	-0.31

Drexel University, n = 24	-0.32

University of Texas - Austin, n = 21	-0.46

University of California - Irvine, 

n = 56	-1.21

Georgia Institute of Technology,

 n = 78	-1.46

University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill, n = 24	-1.57

University of Toronto, n = 15	-1.66



One interpretation would gauge the interdisciplinarity of the schools by
the distribution of faculty representing different areas of study; some
schools have chosen to pursue a rich but narrow focus, such as the
University of North Carolina, whose faculty's studies are strongly
centered around library science and computer and information science. In
contrast, schools such as the University of Michigan have made a
specific goal of cultivating a broadly interdisciplinary faculty, and
have hired academics representing 11 of the 13 aggregated CIP families.
The disciplinary diversity measure seems to support this interpretation.
Michigan and Syracuse stand out with the highest scores, indicating the
greatest interdisciplinarity, while schools such as UNC and the
University of Toronto cluster together with the lowest scores,
indicating the greatest focus in subject specialization.

The variations in disciplinary diversity indicate different approaches
to building an organizational identity through hiring practices at each
iSchool, as each faculty represents a different composition of
disciplinary expertise. Naturally, a small faculty will tend to
represent fewer disciplines, but as Table 4 suggests, size and
disciplinary diversity are not strongly correlated (r = 0.18). In the
iSchools, a full-time faculty of 25 or fewer persons will most likely
have faculty expertise in five or fewer broad disciplines; one notable
exception is the University of Maryland, where a small faculty of
seventeen individuals spanned eleven disciplines. Above the threshold of
25 full-time faculty members, the iSchools usually employ academics with
expertise in eight or more academic areas of study.

CONCLUSIONS

Finding that peer prestige measures such as USNWR ratings can be
predicted with hiring network statistics is reason to question what
these ratings really mean to a school's identity. Peer ratings can play
an important part in perceptions of a school's prestige and role in the
academic community; as these ratings are targeted to prospective
students, managing the prestige aspects of image and identity may be a
matter of particular interest to iSchool administrators. The iSchool
community itself has expressed concern over explaining the academic
identity of the information field, a challenge that extends to the
degree to which peer prestige ratings do or do not reflect the true
community identity. Because the peer prestige ratings are currently
subject to accreditation-based populations for sampling, an
interdisciplinary community will continue to face challenges in
achieving a useful summary representation of the relative identities of
its constituents.

We intend to track the changes to iSchool faculty rosters on an annual
basis, generating a series of data sets that reflect snapshots in the
evolution of the hiring network structure. This research will monitor
whether the interdisciplinary field of information is following the
trend of most academic disciplines, in which a stratified prestige
structure becomes one of the strongest determinants in the placement of
graduates. Comparison to the CS hiring network shows some meaningful
differences from this trend, suggesting that the interdisciplinarity of
the iSchool community could prevent the level of prestige-based academic
inbreeding observed in other disciplines.

There are a number of additional possibilities for future research, such
as generating a hiring network of all ALA-accredited institutions for
comparison to the iSchools, which might highlight interesting
differences between the hiring structures of traditional LIS programs
and the interdisciplinary iSchools. In addition, the data from and
results of this study could be compared to a complementary network
representing iSchool PhD graduate placement. Finally, analysis merging
iSchool hiring and PhD graduate placement data sets would offer a more
holistic view of the interactions of intellectual exchange in the
community.

As an artifact of the information school movement, this study holds a
mirror up to the iSchool community, but it must be clear that there is
no “fairest of them all” as suggested by prestige ratings. The
multiplicity of criteria that are relevant to the true measures of
success in an institution may be commonly held among many of the schools
in the community, but the valuation of those factors is unique to each
institutional context.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Special thanks to Dragomir Radev and Sam Pollack at the University of
Michigan and Cristian Estan at the University of Wisconsin-Madison for
sharing their complimentary computer science department hiring data set.

REFERENCES

Gioia, D., and Thomas, J. 1996. Identity, Image and Issue
Interpretation, Sensemaking During Strategic Change in Academia. Admin.
Sci. Quart. 41, 3, 370-403.

Morse, R., and Flanigan, S. 2006. America’s Best Graduate Schools
2007. U. S. News & World Report online supplement.

Maher, B., et al. 1995. Research-Doctorate Programs in the United
States: Continuity and Change. ed. Goldberger, M. National Academies
Press.

Annabi, H., Fisher, K. and Mai, J.-E. 2005. Our Academic Life:
Challenges Facing i-Schools. Conference paper. (Pennsylvania State
University, 2005). iConference 2005.

Leazer, G. 2005. Split Down the Middle, Fuzzy at the Edges: Defining a
Field Epiphenomenally. Conference paper. (Pennsylvania State University,
2005). iConference 2005.

Tyworth, M., and Sawyer, S. 2005. I-Conference Identity and Issues
Survey Summary. Conference survey results. Retrieved from
http://bcs.ist.psu.edu/iconference/notes/iconf_final_results.pdf,
October 12, 2006.

Lyytinen, K. and King, J. L. 2004. Nothing at the Center? : Academic
Legitimacy in the Information Systems Field. J. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 5,
6, 220-246.

Small, M. 1999. Departmental Conditions and the Emergence of New
Disciplines: Two Cases in the Legitimation of African-American Studies.
Theor. Soc. 28, 5, 659-607.

Bair, J. 2003. Hiring Practices in Finance Education. Linkages Among
Top-Ranked Graduate Programs. Am. J. Econ. Sociol. 62, 2, 429-433.

Baldi, S. 1995. Prestige Determinants of First Academic Job for New
Sociology Ph.D.s 1985-1992. Sociol. Quart. 36, 4, 777-789.

Burris, V. 2004. The Academic Caste System: Prestige Hierarchies in PhD
Exchange Networks. Am. Sociol. Rev. 69, 2, 229-237.

Long, J., Allison, P. and McGinnis, R. 1979. Entrance into the Academic
Career. Am. Sociol. Rev. 44, 5, 816-830.

Bedeian, A. and Feild, H. 1980. Academic Stratification in Graduate
Management Programs: Departmental Prestige and Faculty Hiring Patterns.
J. Manage. 6, 2, 99-115.

Hunt, J. and Blair, J. 1987. Content, Process and the Matthew Effect
Among Management Academics. J. Manage. 13, 2, 191-210.

Long, J. 1978. Productivity and Academic Position in the Scientific
Career. Am. Sociol. Rev. 43, 6, 889-908.

Long, J. and McGinnis, R. 1981. Organizational Context and Scientific
Productivity. Am. Sociol. Rev. 46, 4, 422-442.

Adkins, D. and Budd, J. 2007. Scholarly productivity of U.S. LIS
faculty. Libr. Inform. Sci. Res. 29, 1, 154-158.

Meho, L. and Spurgin, K. 2005. Ranking the research productivity of
library and information science faculty and schools: An evaluation of
data sources and research methods. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Tec. 56, 12,
1314-1331.

Matia, K., et al. 2005. Scaling phenomena in the growth dynamics of
scientific output. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Tec. 56, 9, 893-902.

Maher, B.A., et al. 1995. Research-Doctorate Programs in the United
States: Continuity and Change. ed. Goldberger, M. National Academies
Press.

Shannon, C. 1948. A Mathematical Theory of Communication. AT&T Tech. J.
27, 379-423 and 623-656.

Watts, D., Dodds, P., and Newman, M. 2002. Identity and Search in Social
Networks. Science. 296, 1302-1305.

 PAGE   

Figure 1. The iSchool community is composed of faculty from a broad
range of academic disciplines.

.

