Community Informatics

Williams, Kate (1); Durrance, Joan (2); Rosenbaum, Howard (3) 

1: U of Illinois, United States of America; 2: U of Michigan, United
States of America; 3: Indiana U

This proposal is for three papers which would form all or part of a
panel presentation reporting current work in community informatics at
three ischools. It complements the wildcard proposal submitted on
community technology/information/informatics, which we are each also
part of. If there are 1-2 other paper proposals in this area we would be
glad to be combined in one session with them.

As per the request for anonymity, the paper numbers correspond to the
authors index in the webform.

All three of us will present.

1 Paper: TOP Data Archive: Repurposing data to advance the emerging
field of community informatics

When a federal program which funded 600 community informatics projects
over 11 years was shut down, researchers and staff worked to repurpose
their files into a research dataset. Organizing the
physical-plus-digital archive into a distributed collection proved to be
effective teaching and research at two i-schools and one library school.
A number of scholars across several disciplines are now using the
dataset for their investigations. To our knowledge, there is no other
shared community informatics dataset.

Analysis of the TOP data is deepening our understanding of several
questions, among them how social capital and social networks interact
with technology in local communities, and allowing us to inform
policymakers interested in TOP 2.0. The presentation will report the
methods used and the results thus far.

2 Paper: Identifying Community-Centered Outcomes

Nonprofits still struggle as they attempt to effectively identify
specific outcomes of their services that accrue to individuals, their
families, community groups, and the larger community. These skills are
essential both to community-focused ICTs, libraries and other nonprofit
staff and to students who seek to build their careers in these
institutions. Faculty at iSchools that have embraced community
informatics are now beginning to give students the knowledge and
experience needed to help community organizations more effectively meet
community needs and tell their story. This presentation will provide a
contextual framework for identifying and presenting outcomes. More
importantly it will provide examples of outcomes identified by graduate
students who have conducted field-based outcome studies of a variety of
community organizations. Outcome categories include increasing knowledge
and skill levels, personal efficacy gains, fostering social capital,
etc.

3 Paper: Theorizing community informatics: Memory practices in online
communities

Based in the insight that digital archiving is a fundamental process in
the sciences, Bowker (2005) has proposed the concept of memory practices
as a way to understand a new regime of information and communication
technologies for recording and storing memory. He argues that these
practices are technical and social and include shared standards,
meanings and protocols; they allow data and information to be stored and
forgotten and then retrieved and remembered. In his view, they are
routine components of of work practices, imposing order on things,
holding and shaping experience. This paper explores the utility of
memory practices, seen here as technologies of remembering and
forgetting, for understanding the infrastructures on which online
communities depend.

