Culture At the Interface: Collaborative Design and Information
Management with Indigenous Communities

Christen, Kimberly (1); Dietrich, Craig (2); Srinivasan, Ramesh (3) 

1: Washington State University; 2: University of Iowa; 3: University of
California, Los Angeles

Digital technologies provide the platform for both preserving and
producing cultural knowledge and materials. Indigenous and other
subaltern cultural perspectives on access, authority, and accountability
in relation to cultural materials and knowledge are often marginalized
in dominant narratives about the possibilities of digital technologies.
Mainstream notions of “search” and “open access” –guided by
Google’s mantra of providing universal access to everything—often
leave out, or too easily blur, the lines between the multiple forms of
technological translations and “other” knowledge/property systems.
While digital technologies have much to offer to museums and other
archival institutions and their many publics, their use needs to call in
to question the viability of universal logics of search and access.

Since the mid 1990s, museums, archives, libraries and especially land
grant universities in the United States have recognized the need to
direct their energies towards outreach to the indigenous communities
whose materials they hold. Many archives have signed Memorandums of
Understanding (MOUs) with indigenous communities promising access and
support in retrieving materials. Digital technologies have allowed
archives to produce online databases and expand their physical catalogs
with digital repositories. At the same time, archival mandates to
preserve information intersect with the capabilities of digital
technologies to distribute information over networks. In the context of
“information freedom” rhetoric and appeals for “access to
knowledge” archives have found themselves at the center of information
management debates and strategies for new models for information
indexing and distribution.

Museums and archives, now enlivened by the possibilities afforded by
digital technologies, are at a crossroads in dealing with emergent
information management systems and the cultural, ethical, and legal
commitments they have to their multiple stakeholders. Making their
materials “open” on the one hand, and working with divergent
protocols for access and distribution on the other, In addition,
physical distances, educational and linguistic barriers, and high levels
of poverty have all made traditional archives unapproachable places for
indigenous communities whose cultural materials and institutional
histories are preserved within them. However, in the last ten years
there has been a groundswell of activity lead by local indigenous
communities in conversation with museums, archives, and technologists to
incorporate indigenous cultural protocols into the parameters of
archival sensibilities, design, and infrastructure. Projects around the
world are seeking to integrate indigenous protocols into their
informatics.

The papers in this panel focus on collaborative efforts between museums,
archives and local indigenous communities in Australia and Native North
America to create digital archival systems informed by indigenous
practices and protocols. The panel members come from diverse academic
and technological backgrounds representing the Fine Arts, Humanities and
Social Sciences. Their work is informed by interdisciplinary concerns
shaping scholars' understandings of the practical uses of digital
technologies for underrepresented groups and the collaborative ways in
which technology can be leveraged in service of cultural differences.

The first paper (co –presented by the principal investigator and
software designer) based on ten years of collaborative work with
Warumungu community members in Australia’s Northern Territory,
examines the production of an indigenous community digital archive and
its internal search functionality. The Mukurtu Wumpurrarni-kari archive,
installed in the community in August 2007, leverages Warumungu protocols
for the reproduction, distribution, and access to cultural materials and
their associated knowledge within the design and structure of the
archive. A series of restrictions and “sharing protocols”
–designated by the Warumungu community—drives the searching, sorting
and sharing of all materials in the system. The archive, thus,
challenges dominant narratives of openness and accessibility in relation
to intangible cultural materials and acts as a practical solution to
issues of preservation, access, and distribution that face indigenous
people globally.

The second paper describes a NSF-funded initiative which involves a
direct partnership with the Zuni nation of New Mexico and the Cambridge
(UK) Digital Museum Initiative. This partnership involves the study of
how digital objects of excavated cultural materials can become the bases
for indigenous engagement, and stimulate the release of indigenous and
cross-cultural voices into the larger world of how digital systems are
developed. It questions the assumptions that all “information is
free” and should be widely disseminated without a sense of bounds,
authorship, or culturally-specific forms of reception. Moreover, it
questions the pre-existing classification systems for digital libraries
and museums and argues for a more participatory model. Finally, it
investigates the possibilities of creating information commonses based
around diverse voices that indigenize processes of tagging, blogging,
and commenting.

