Discipline Formation and the Field of Information

Miksa, Fran 

School of Information, University of Texas at Austin

DISCIPLINE FORMATION AND THE FIELD OF INFORMATION

ABSTRACT

The field of information as expressed in the iSchool Caucus is in many
respects a conglomeration of disparate elements. It includes, for
example, elements of several major traditions of information
organization (commonly expressed as service professions) and the social
institutional ties and contexts that some of them entail. In addition
the field has also gathered under its umbrella an impressive array of
such other elements as aspects of cognitive studies, social studies of
the users and use of information, studies and services related to the
Internet and World Wide Web, digital libraries and other systems that
have no particular social institutional setting, digitization
initiatives, not least among which are growing museum and digital
archives movements, studies related to information systems of all kinds
(e.g., interface design, usability testing, security), social issues of
information property and rights, and the entire array of informatics
initiatives, to name only some of the whole. Within this enlarged
context, one issue of significance is the role of discipline formation,
where the latter refers to efforts to identify a fundamental phenomenon
related to larger core professional activities and explain aspects of
that phenomenon through scientific methodology and objectivity.

The purpose of this paper is to use two examples of discipline formation
within traditions of information organization (Bibliography and
Computerized information storage and retrieval) as a basis for enriching
and provoking our contemporary understanding of discipline formation
within the field of information. As such, it focuses on the fourth
review criterion of the iSchool Caucus program: “develops intellectual
geographies in which attendees can learn about intellectual domains not
their own but part of the multi-disciplinary iSchool space.”

Background

A tradition consists of a cluster of activities, objects, and ideas that
are handed down from generation to generation in human society. Each
such tradition gains adherents and subsequently evolves and shifts
through endogenous and exogenous factors. A tradition of information
organization has to do more specifically with activities and ideas
related to organizing information objects and the information embedded
in such objects. Traditions of information organization go beyond
practical techniques. For example, they include ideas related to values
that are attributed by their adherents to information objects as objects
and the information they contain and to the roles and uses of such
objects and their informational content in society. All major traditions
of information organization in the modern period have had their
beginnings in the form of what today would be called service
professions.

The Two Examples

Two traditions of information organization—Bibliography (over five
centuries old) and Computerized information storage and retrieval
(CISAR), the latter encompassing a wide variety of activities developed
in the post-WWII era—provide a basis for raising questions about
discipline formation within the field of information. Salient features
include the fact that each took as its beginning point the
identification, representation and item-by-item listing of documents
deemed of value for their subject content. Each initially took on
professional service ideals related to the crisis of providing access to
burgeoning publications, especially in the realm of scholarly and
scientific research. Despite such service profession orientations and
unlike other traditions of information organization, each has been
relatively free from the constraints of a specific social institutional
setting. Each went through periods of attempting to describe and clarify
what amounted to uncertain boundaries and often-changing content. Each
developed commercial expressions of its work, though in the case of
Bibliography commercial expressions came to be expressed chiefly in the
form of two traditions of information organization—Indexing and
Documentation—for which it was the principal seedbed.

Most significantly, each of these traditions gave rise to discipline
formation within its boundaries—Bibliography in the form of Analytical
(or Critical) bibliography, CISAR in the form of Bibliometrics and
Computational information retrieval. Each effort in discipline formation
had both positive and negative effects. Positive effects consisted of
the satisfaction gained by its adherents of being able to state more
precisely what their realm of scholarly endeavor entailed, an increase
in scholarly status within the general academic community, and attendant
increases in public acceptance and funding that an improved status
generated. Negative effects included various expressions of alienation
of the adherents in the parent tradition when those forming a
disciplinary focus in this way attempted to distance themselves from the
parent tradition, and the effect of criticisms of the scientific base of
the new discipline that were generated because of the conflict involved.

Why This Matters

Discipline formation within the field of information seems inevitable or
at least highly probable (if not already well underway) given the status
that disciplinary work generates in the modern world. And given that
inevitability or high probability, it seems appropriate to try to apply
at least some of what occurred in the two instances described here to
the current information field situation. However, taking such notice of
such past developments and applying the latter to the present situation
can best be done not in the form of predictions which are all but
impossible, but by attempting to pose useful questions based on or at
least provoked by relevant issues in the past.

A list of more general topics around which such questions might revolve
include the existence of professional service ideals and their
relationship to the idea of an academic discipline focus, the problem of
defining boundaries and content of the field as a whole or of some
elements of the field (e.g., an information organization tradition
within the field), and the role of commercial parameters of the field.
Topics more specific to discipline formation itself might include the
importance of identifying a fundamental phenomenon to which rigorous
scientific methods and explanation may be applied, how differing
phenomena might yield different discipline formation efforts and how
they might co-exist, and both positive and negative effects of
discipline formation for the field as a whole. More specific questions
might, for example, take the form of 1) Can information service
profession needs co-exist with discipline formation within the
information field and, if so, how? 2) What are the costs of severing
ties (for various reasons) with parent traditions of information
organization and their social institutional settings ? 3) What might be
expected in the way of idea interplay regarding the scientific basis and
objectivity of a discipline within the larger information arena? 4) What
might be the stance of the information field in general towards
discipline formation that downplays scientific methodologies and
explanations? Suggestions will be made about how to think about answers
to questions such as these, though the purpose of raising them as well
as reciting the comparison provided here that lies behind them and that
prompted them is to provoke discussions as to what questions regarding
discipline formation within the information field are the most
important.

