Essay for the 2008 I-Conference, 28 February – 2 March, 2008, Los Angeles, CA (v7, as of 27 February, 2008, 2600 words)

I-Schools: Mice Roaring or the Future is Now Arriving?1,2
Steve Sawyer
College of Information Sciences and Technology
Penn State University
sawyer@ist.psu.edu
Howard Rosenbaum
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
Indiana University
hrosenba@indiana.edu
Through this essay we develop an argument for supporting the growth of I-Schools by building
on the literature and concepts of institutions. We first argue that I-Schools, and the I-School
movement, can be seen as engaging in a process of institutionalization. That is, they are seeking
each and collectively to become self-sustaining and enduring social units. To support this
argument we draw on the literatures regarding institutions and institutionalization. We do so to
help clarify what those involved in the I-School movement might need to do to encourage the
process of I-Schools becoming become enduring and self-replicating forms of organization in the
contemporary university milieu. The literature on institutions and institutionalizing is vast,
active, and multi-threaded. In this essay we draw from, but do not summarize or extend this
work. We draw on concepts from institutional theory to frame our thesis: what can those
involved in I-Schools do to encourage the growth and legitimization of these scholarly
institutions?

On becoming an institution
An institution is a representation of a social order or pattern, continually reproduced, which owes
its continued existence to relatively self-activating or automatic social processes (Scott, 1994a,
1995; 2001 DiMaggio & Powell, 1991; Brint & Karabel, 1991; Zucker, 1977, 1983, 1987;
Jepperson, 1991). Scott’s (1995, 2001) comprehensive definition of an institution focuses
attention to the cognitive, normative, and regulative structures and activities which provide
stability and meaning to collective social behavior. Scott (1995; 2001) argues that institutions are
1 The title is a not-so-subtle pointer to two entertainment icons. The first is the 1955 book and 1959 movie “A
Mouse that Roared” (see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mouse_That_Roared). Given the physical location of the
2008 I-School Conference in Los Angeles, it seems apropos to appeal to movies and entertainment for this topic.
The book and movie plot centers on the concerns and desires of a fictional, tiny, European nation – the Duchy of
Grand Fenwick, – and their plan to attack the United States. Having seen the positive effects of losing a war to the
United States and earning reconstruction money, they set off to lose. However, through a series of bumbles and
twists of fate (wonderfully portrayed in the movie through the comedic genius of the late Peter Sellers), Grand
Fenwick defeats the United States – by accidentally gaining position of the ‘Q-Bomb:’ the most lethal weapon ever
devised. The second not-so-subtle pointer embedded into the title is to the “Tomorrowland Transit Authority” ride
at Disneyworld’s Magic Kingdom. This ride carries you from the contemporary world into the technological utopia
of Tomorrow.
2 Comments on previous versions by Kristin Price and three anonymous reviewers have helped us to improve the
current version. Thank you.

1

multi-faceted social arrangements which incorporate systems of symbols. These symbols include
the cognitive constructions that reflect awareness, normative rules that help to structure behavior
and interaction, and regulative processes that are carried out through and shape social behavior
via incentives and constraints. Moreover, artifacts can carry symbols – such as power and
prestige in the design of buildings and the layout of office spaces. Seen this way, an institution is
“a set of roles, graded in authority, that have been embodied in consistent patterns of actions, that
have been legitimated and sanctioned by society or segments of that society; whose purpose is to
carry out certain activities or prescribed needs of that society or segments of that society.” (Mills,
1959)
Repeated and regularized social actions becomes identifiable as belonging to an institution when
self-perpetuating internal social patterns reproduce themselves without the need of special
sustaining action or collective action by its members (Painter, 2002). In the I-School context, this
is seen in faculty of different research paradigms and from different scholarly disciplines getting
together and resolving their difference to hire, tenure and promote their peers; to recruit and
educate graduate students; and, to establish common language regarding inter-disciplines and
interactions. In doing this patterns of action emerge and others, seeing, this, replicate these
patterns by choice. Routine procedures support and sustain the pattern, furthering its
reproduction, unless collective action blocks or external shocks disrupt the pattern (Jepperson,
1991). That is, formation is fragile and often disrupted by failures of some to reproduce the act
(or by outside forces that block reproduction).
Seen this way, the “I-School as institution” arises out of constantly (re-)enacted practices from
which evolve stable sets of structures with formalized rules and laws. These structures of rules,
laws, norms of behavior and collected practices become visible to others and are internalized by
individuals. In turn, these individuals reinforce the normative and regulative aspects of an
institution through repetition and reproduction.
Institutions take many forms. A profession or occupation becomes professionalized or
institutionalized when they are believed to require extensive formalized study and a mastery of
specialized knowledge; are autonomous; self-restricted and self-regulated; and generally
exclusive. A professional institution includes organizational structures and mechanisms for
preserving the knowledge and the practices of its constituents, enforcing the standards, and
educating future members of the profession (Tseng, 1992; Carter, Grebner, Seaman, and Foret,
1990). Drawing from and combining these, we argue here and in other writings that a working
definition of a Scholarly Institution as one form of professional institution, focusing on academic
missions, and which shares the following characteristics with all institutions3:
1. Automatic: self replicating;
2. Autonomous: self-regulating;
3. Structurally stable: possessing formalized norms and cultures;
4. Visible: having a coherent outward appearance.
The constituent elements and processes that go into forming institutions are a very active area of
scholarship (Frumpkin and Kaplan, 2005). Most institutional research has focused on the effect
3

See also: Sawyer, S. and Tapia, A. (2007) “From Findings to Theories: Speculating on the Future of Social
Informatics” The Information Society, 23(4), 263-277.

2

of institutions as independent variables, at the expense of an examination of the determinants and
components of institutions and the process by which institutions become constructed remains a
“black box” (Zucker, 1988: 104). In contrast, our interest here is to institutional formation.
One promising approach to understanding the development of institutions is to see it as a
structurational activity – drawing on Gidden’s theory of structuration (e.g., DiMaggio & Powell,
1983; DiMaggio & Powell, 1991; Scott, 1994a; Barley and Tolbert, 1997). Framed as a
structurational process, institutionalization arises as patterns of interaction emerge out of loosely
organized technical activities. According to the tenets of structuration theory, institutions
emerge out of a dynamic in which individuals are shaped by institutional forces and then act
upon their institutionalized environments to transform institutional arrangements (Tolbert and
Barley, 1997). Change comes about in institutional environments when some event or
development breaks the patterns established by previously recurrent actions and reflexive
behavior of individuals. Seen this way, institutionalization is the process of these patterns of
interaction becoming more stable. In doing this, they serve to infuse a normative order or a set
of normative values into the organization (Broom and Selznik, 1955).

What we in I-Schools can do
We argue that becoming a scholarly institution requires concerted local and collective efforts.
Both are required because each I-School must pursue institutional legitimization locally. And,
collectively, these I-Schools must also establish a collective institutional presence. Both of these
efforts must focus on institutional growth and maturity relative to becoming self- replicating;
self-regulating; structurally stable, and visible. Self-replicating and self-regulating mean that new
I-Schools are started and that there is some coherence of identity across the organizational units
who claim to be I-Schools and that all I-Schools, collectively, have a coherent set of criteria for
belonging (or not). By structurally stable, we mean that I-Schools possess formalized norms and
regulative activities such as rules of local and collective membership and some common bodies
of knowledge. By visible we mean that I-Schools have a coherent outward appearance: others
can distinguish that a particular academic unit is, or is not, an I-School. Visibility also demands
that I-Schools, collectively, can be discerned as a distinct academic form. In the rest of the essay
we raise issues and opportunities relative to each of these five characteristics of a scholarly
institution.
Pursuing self replication: To achieve this requires both a growth in the number of I-School
programs and the development and formalization of shared structures and norms. Several
activities suggest this is ongoing, for example there are three mechanisms that bring together the
I-School leaders and faculty. The first is the I-Conference, which is currently the only
community-wide endeavor that engages students, faculty and administrative leadership. The
other two – the self-selected and independent I-School caucus and the Computing Research
Association (CRA) - sponsored IT Dean’s groups –provide senior administrators of I-Schools
and units with similarities to I-Schools with forums to share structures and develop common
norms at the most senior administrative level. One outgrowth of this is the rise in meetings of
other senior academic and administrative staff (such as research deans, communications, and
various common degree programs).
There are at least two aspects of self- replication that deserve additional attention. The first is

3

active encouragement towards faculty and academic leadership of other universities to consider
starting or developing I-Schools. There are likely a limited number of universities considering
starting from scratch new I-School programs. And, there are relatively few programs whose
histories are centered in Library and Information Science who have not begun to transit towards
I-School-like programs. Since these two paths are where most of the existing I-Schools drew
from, new sources of growth are needed. The most likely pathway for this is to engage
colleagues in scholarly fields such as communications and computing to consider becoming
more “I-like.” Other possibilities are to draw information systems scholars from business
schools (as some senior scholars in this area are advocating, e.g., Avison and Ein-Dor, 2007).
The second aspect of self-replication deserving more attention is the development of common
structures and norms – elements of a shared culture. Again, there is some progress at an
informal level. For example, many of the current I-Schools – and particularly those who have
histories in Library and Information Science – have a strong humanistic and informational
perspective. Other currently self-identified I-Schools, however, do not have these norms as
deeply-ingrained. Still others are developing unique sets of norms. The various mechanisms for
having I-School faculty and administrative leadership get together provides for one means to
share and develop common structures. Increasingly, however, this attention should be focusing
on ensuring that these structures and norms are part of the undergraduate and graduate training
and education. And, for institutional legitimization in the academy, graduate students are often
seen as the carriers of common structures and norms.
Pursuing self-regulation: Autonomy in a multi-disciplinary space is one of balance. To maintain
multi-disciplinarity demands both development of a common core of knowledge while retaining
strong ties to the reference or contributing scholarly disciplines. Without a common core, the
space is ephemeral – a collection of local and informal interactions, with no permanence.
Without strong connection to reference disciplines, the space becomes an orphan and is too
easily ignored.
There are at least three opportunities before I-School members to increase the level of selfregulation. The first is to make explicit a focus on building I-School faculties whose intellectual
heritage combines both scholarly training from outside I-Schools with an equal commitment to
hiring I-School-trained students as faculty. This dual strategy provides a means to keep the ISchools connected to relevant scholarly disciplines even as they develop a core inter-disciplinary
structure. Too much focus on internal-to-I-Schools-faculty-hires might lead to where the
collection of schools becomes self-referential, disconnected from disciplines and ignored. Too
great a focus on hiring primarily from referent disciplines might lead to where no sustaining
cross-disciplinary interconnections form.
Second, it is important to ensure that I-School-trained graduate students secure (and succeed) in
faculty positions in the reference or contributing scholarly disciplines. If this does not happen,
then the ‘special sauce’ of interdisciplinary scholarly development that I-Schools advocate is a
core competency becomes moot through non-consumption.
Third, there should be more effort to develop future administrative leaders from within ISchools. Currently this is hard given the limited numbers of I-School faculty and the limited

4

opportunities for I-School faculty to gain administrative experience (there are few departments in
the few programs, and few associate dean positions, meaning it is relatively difficult to develop
internal-to-I-School candidate pools). One possibility is to begin holding a summer institute for
faculty who are interested in pursuing I-School administration. This institute provides a means
for faculty from outside I-Schools to learn more about these scholarly institutions. Doing this
provides a means to increase the pool of possible leaders, expand the scale and support selfreplication activities, and also to export I-School ideas.
Pursuing structural stability: Structural stability reflects both a commitment by members to
pursue collectively a common set of core issues and to be rewarded for doing so. For I-Schools,
this translates into developing the formal and informal norms that recognize and reward faculty
for both maintaining a strong connection to research communities that extend beyond I-Schools
into reference or contributing academic disciplines while also supporting faculty for engaging
more directly (particularly with colleagues at their home institution) in discipline-crossing
activities. These norms and incentives must be reflected in the hiring, tenure, promotion and
merit-review processes of faculty
Pursuing visibility: Visibility means having a coherent outward appearance. This has been the
focus of the I-School caucus and academic leadership, and should be a continued focus. There is
also evidence that faculty are beginning to help make I-Schools more visible. For example, the
I-Schools and I-School faculty are very involved in the research fields of human-computer
interaction (HCI), participatory design, computer-supported cooperative work and social
informatics research communities. This involvement leads to where others in these research
communities, and particularly younger faculty and graduate students, see I-Schools as a viable, if
not preferred, choice for an academic home.
The evidence suggests that I-School faculty and administrative leadership are making steps
towards becoming a scholarly institution. The need for collective action to be focused and to
pursue the efforts needed to ensure institutionalization benefit all of us. These actions also
demand our time and attention.

References
Avison, D. & Ein-Dor, P. (2007). Diversity in IS Research and Practice, Proceedings of the 2007
International Conference on Information Systems, Montreal, Canada, ACM Press.
Brint, S. & Karabel, J. (1991). Institutional Origins and Transformations: The Case of American
Community Colleges, In The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, ed. Walter W.
Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio, 337-360. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Barley, S. & Tolbert, P. (1997). Institutionalization as Structuration: Methods and Analytic
Strategies for Studying Links Between Action and Structure, Organization Studies, 18(1),
93-117.
Broom, L. & Selznik, P. (1955) Sociology, Row, Peterson and Company, Evanston, IL.
Carter, M., Grebner, F., Seaman, J. & Foret, C. (1990). Occupation to Profession Continuum -Status and Future of AAHPERD". Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and Dance,
61(3), 1-14.

5

DiMaggio, P. & Powell, W. (1991). Introduction, In The New Institutionalism in Organizational
Analysis. ed. W. Powell and P. DiMaggio, 1-38. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
DiMaggio, P. & Powell, W. (1991). The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and
Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields, In The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis. ed. W. Powell and P. DiMaggio, 63-82. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Jepperson, R. 1991. Institutions, Institutional Effects and Institutionalism, In The New
Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis. ed. W. Powell & P. DiMaggio, 143-164.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mills, C. (1959). The sociological imagination, Oxford University Press, London.
Painter, C. (2002). Early Leader Effects on the Process of Institutionalization Through Cultural
Embedding: The Cases of William J. Donovan, Allen W. Dulles, and J. Edgar Hoover,
Unpublished Dissertation. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.
Scott. W. (1994). Institutions and Organizations: Toward a Theoretical Synthesis, In Institutional
Environments and Organizations: Structural Complexity and Individualism. W. R. Scott, J.
Meyer, et. al., 55-80. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Scott, W. (1995). Introduction: Institutional Theory and Organizations, In The Institutional
Construction of Organizations: International and Longitudinal Studies. ed. W. Scott and S.
Christensen, xi-xxiii. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Scott, W. (2001). Institutions and Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tseng, J. (1992). Interpreting as an Emerging Profession in Taiwan -- A Sociological Model.
Unpublished manuscript, Fu Jen Catholic University, Taiwan.
Zucker, L. (1977). The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence, American
Sociological Review, 42(5), 726-743.
Zucker. (1983). Organizations as Institutions, in Samuel B. Bacharach ed. Research in the
Sociology of Organizations, 2, 1-47. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Zucker. (1987). Institutional Theories of Organizations, Annual Review of Sociology, 13, 443464.
Zucker, L. (1988). Where Do Institutional Patterns Come From?, In Institutional Patterns and
Organizations. ed. L. Zucker, 21-43. Cambridge, Mass: Ballinger.

6

