I-School Curricula:

How Wide?  How Deep?

Dr. Richard A. Thompson

Telecommunications Program

School of Information Sciences

University of Pittsburgh

Personal Comment:

I recently stepped down after serving as Chair of Pitt’s Telecom
Program for 16 years.  The “fit” of a Telecom Program inside SIS at
Pitt has been an ongoing discussion for most of my tenure.  Now, as SIS
tries to conform to the evolving definition of what an “I-School”
is, the discussion of this “fit” has taken on even greater
relevance.  In my discussions with Dean Larsen in the last several
years, I tried to cast the problem to be part of a larger one, which is:
 just how “wide” and “deep” should an I-School’s curriculum
be?  This talk/paper represents the state of this “larger”
discussion, which Dean Larsen and I believe might be relevant to all
I-Conference attendees.

Abstract:

The various academic disciplines are shown to occupy the space of human
knowledge.  One objective of this talk/paper is to propose how the
I-School disciplines fit among the neighboring disciplines, and which
disciplines are close or distant.  The various classic disciplines are
seen to distribute differently over a “Level of Abstraction”
dimension (six levels are defined) in which Philosophy is mostly
abstract and Engineeri-ng is mostly concrete.  Then, this talk/paper
discusses the I-disciplines’ abstraction-profile in significant
detail.  Curricular “depth” is defined as the number of layers of
abstraction that should be included (I argue for five of the six).

It is observed that the I-disciplines have different
discipline-neighbors at different levels of abstraction.  For example,
at the highest level of abstraction, the near neighbors are Philosophy
(for Ethics) and Sociology (Maslow’s needs) and, at the lowest level
of abstraction, the near neighbors are Computer Science and Electrical
Engineering (imple-menting Information systems).  In between, our near
neighbors are Psychology (cogni-tion), Business, Law, Literature,
Political Science, and others.  The role of a “Profession-al School”
is factored in.  Then, the case is made that the I-School’s
“sub-disciplines” (six are defined) may have different
abstraction-profiles and different neighbors.

Curricular “width” is defined as how close our curricula should get
to those of our near neighbors.  Finally, “holes” are identified in
the spaces between the I-disciplines and their neighbors.  These holes
represent significant areas of human knowledge, which are typically
excluded from the academic disciplines at most universities. 
Professionals who have filled these holes have done it, perhaps poorly,
by their own cleverness.  This talk/ paper argues that the I-Schools
should strive to fill those holes, but doing so may require even greater
curricular width.

I-School Curricula:  How Wide?  How Deep?



Dr. Richard A. Thompson

Telecommunications Program

School of Information Sciences

University of Pittsburgh, 15260

US (412) 624-9423

  HYPERLINK "mailto:thompson@sis.pitt.edu"  thompson@sis.pitt.edu 

ABSTRACT

The emerging discipline we call Information Science is shown to fit
among its neighboring disciplines.  After proposing any aca-demic
discipline’s six levels of abstraction, and using them to define
curricular “depth,” detailed investigation reveals that IS butts
against different neighboring disciplines at different levels.  Then,
after proposing IS’ six sub-disciplines, they are shown not only to
have different distributions across their levels of abstract-tion, but
also to butt up against different neighboring disciplines.  An
I-School’s role as a “professional school” is factored into this
discussion.

Curricular “width” is defined as how close a curriculum should get
to its near neighbors.  Then, “holes” are identified in the spaces
between the I-disciplines and their neighbors.  These holes represent
areas of human knowledge, which are typically ex-cluded from all the
academic disciplines at most universities.  It is argued here that
I-Schools should strive to fill those holes by expanding their
curricular width.

Topic

Nature and scope of iSchools and iResearch

Keywords

Curriculum, Discipline, Information Science

INTRODUCTION

The paper is introduced on a personal note.  I recently stepped down
after serving for 16 years as the Chair of the Telecommu-nications
Program at the University of Pittsburgh.  One of my more important
activities during these years has been to parti-cipate with the chairs
of the nation’s other “Telecom” programs in defining Telecom as an
academic discipline.  Similar to the con-sortium of “I-Schools,” the
nation’s “T-Programs” have tried to organized themselves, most
recently under the banner of the International Telecommunications
Education and Research Asso-ciation (ITERA).  A corresponding paper [1],
which asks the same questions of Telecom Programs that this paper asks
of I-Schools, will be presented at the ITERA-08 Conference.

A related ongoing discussion during my tenure as Telecom Program Chair
has been how my Telecom Program “fits” inside the School of
Information Sciences at Pitt.  Now, as SIS tries to conform itself to
the evolving definition of what an “I-School” is, the discussion of
this “fit” has taken on even greater relevance.  In my discussions
with Dean Larsen in the last several years, I have tried to cast the
problem to be part of a larger one, which is:  how “wide” and how
“deep” should an I-School’s curriculum be?  This paper represents
the state of this “larger” discussion, which Dean Larsen and I
believe might be relevant to all the I-Schools.

So, this paper proposes a two-dimensional universe for academic
disciplines, attempts to place IS in this universe, and discusses the
“fit” and the “holes.”  The paper is not the “be-all and
end-all” on this topic.  Instead, it is intended to act as a framework
that might guide the discussion which completes what this paper only
begins.  The paper asks more questions than it answers and, in fact, six
questions are explicitly stated.

THE SPACE OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE

Academic disciplines occupy a multi-dimensional space of human
knowledge.  This paper focuses on two of these dimensions, as shown in
Figure 1 below.

 

Two Dimensions

The Content Dimension, shown horizontally, is a spectrum that runs from
the Fine Arts, through the Humanities and Social Sciences, to the Hard
Sciences.  The six columns represent only a few of the hundred or more
recognized academic disciplines.

The Abstraction Dimension, shown vertically, is a spec-trum of the level
of detail and theory that is typically investigated in each respective
discipline.   While Figure 1 shows only three levels of abstraction,
this paper is based on these six:

Rationale – a discipline’s broad justification.

Framework – broad theory that establishes terminology in which to base
generalized discussion and a structure for the discipline.

Practice – the details that are needed by the people who will work in
the field of endeavor that corresponds to the discipline.

Optimization – detailed generalization and theory for the purpose of
proving results, and determining various optimizations and best
practices.

Implementation – study of underlying infrastructure.

Fundamentals – basic underlying principles.

For example, consider Education as an academic discipline.  Its
Rationale includes the discipline’s rather self-evident purpose and
motivation and its Framework includes issues like Curriculum design
(this paper). Its Practice includes issues like classroom skill,
boardmanship, enunciation, etc. and its Optimization is the body of
knowledge, typically covered in a course on “Ed Psych,” whose
principles would presumably help us be better teachers and write better
books.  Education’s Implementation level includes topics like knowing
how to use Power-Point.  The Education Discipline has few underlying
Fundamentals like we find in Phy-sics (Quantum Theory) or Biology
(Genetics); one might be the elusive definition of learning.

The specification of these levels is certainly arguable; some might be
combined and more might be defined.  The discus-sion in this paper is
based more on agreeing that academic disci-plines have levels like these
than on the details of what the levels are.  However, the next
sub-section provides a little justification.

Question 1:  Are these the appropriate levels of abstraction?

2.2   Sophistication and Theory

Two other concepts related to abstraction are sophistication and theory.
 Sophistication relates to the maturity of the student, while
abstraction relates to the applicability of the material.  As shown in
Figure 2, they are not unrelated.  Mature scholars appreciate

 

abstract issues like rationale and fundamentals, while immature students
demand to know “what good is this?”

	This paper separates theory into three layers, the even-numbered levels
of abstraction in the list above: framework, optimization, and
fundamentals.  Level 2’s separation from Level 4 is based on an
observation from Einstein in his 1933 essay, On the Method of
Theoretical Physics:

 “I want now to glance for a moment at the develop-ment of the
theoretical method, and while doing so especially to observe the
relation of pure theory to the totality of the data of experience.  Here
is the eternal antithesis of the two inseparable constituents of human
knowledge, Experience and Reason, within the sphere of physics. Pure
logical thinking can give us no knowledge whatsoever of the world of
experience; all knowledge about reality begins with experience and
terminates in it.  Conclusions obtained by purely rational processes
are, so far as Reality is concerned, entirely empty.  But if experience
is the beginning and end of all our knowledge about reality, what role
is there left for reason in science?  A complete system of theoretical
physics consists of concepts, and basic laws to interrelate those
concepts, and of consequences to be derived by logical deduction. 
Reason gives the structure to the system; the data of experience and
their mutual relations are to correspond exactly to consequences in the
theory.”

Paraphrasing Einstein, experience (Level 3) without underlying theory
(Levels 2 and 4) is a disconnected set of obser-vations, and theory
without observable verification gives no prac-tical knowledge.  It is
remarkable that a theoretician, as Einstein was, would assert that
theory is subservient to practice; and that its role is to help us
understand practice and it provide a frame-work for organizing our
observations.  However, since not all theory helps to frame our
disciplines, this paper separates theory into two levels at least.

Placing the IS Discipline

The various classic disciplines are distributed differently over the
levels in the Abstraction Dimension.  Consider three examples: 
Philosophy is mostly Rationale and the discipline concentrates at the
upper levels; Engineering is mostly Practice and the various Engineering
disciplines concentrate in the central levels;   Math-ematics, while
shown as an upright rectangle in Figure 1, is the Foundation of the
sciences and, as such, this discipline concen-trates in the lower
levels.

 	In this paper, “depth” is a relative term, defined in the
Abstraction Dimension.  Depth is not the absolute location of a
discipline’s center of gravity along this dimension but is, instead,
the number of levels that receive significant coverage in a given
discipline.  By this definition, Philosophy, Engineering, and
Mathematics are not very deep disciplines.   Examples of deep
disciplines are Music and most of the Social Sciences.  Physics, which
fully engages all six levels of abstraction, is perhaps the deepest of
all the academic disciplines.

The objective of this paper is to propose how our new, emerging
discipline fits into the space of human knowledge with the other, more
established, academic disciplines. Our broadly defined Information
Science discipline must be made to fit in horizontally and vertically. 
The IS discipline’s place in the total space of human knowledge has
“width” and “depth” as illustrated in Figure 3.  We determine
our depth by identifying how our discipline distributes itself across
the vertical “abstraction” axis and identifying our content in each
level.  We determine our width by specifying the location of IS’
center of gravity on the horizontal “discipline” axis, identifying
which disciplines are our neighbors, and identifying how closely our
discipline butts up against these neighbors.  

 Unfortunately, it’s not so simple.  Perhaps, some day it will be,
when our discipline becomes more mature.  But, now, these tasks are
complicated because (1) the disciplines we identify as our neighbors are
different at different levels of abstraction and (2) the distribution
across the “abstraction” dimension is different in our different
sub-disciplines.  Section 3 begins to discuss the issues, and begs for
much more follow-up.

HOW DEEP AND HOW WIDE?

This section uses the following procedure:

Identify IS’ significant sub-disciplines.

Specify the IS discipline’s levels of abstraction and how much content
(depicted as the level’s thickness) we have in each level.

Identify the neighboring disciplines for each level and recommend the
width of each level.

The IS Sub-Disciplines(?)

Like everything else in this paper, this topic requires a lot of
discussion and the proposal here may even be a little contentious.  But,
for our purposes, this paper assumes that Information Sci-ence is a
“super-discipline” (see Section 4.2), comprised of the following six
“sub-disciplines:”

Librarianship

Information Organization

Information Management

Information Systems

Telecommunications

Information Security

We make no attempt here to define or differentiate these; that is an
important but separable, discussion.  The point here is not that we
agree that Information Science has these exact six sub-disciplines, but
simply that we acknowledge that IS has several sub-disciplines, and they
are something like these six.  

Question 2:  Is this the complete list of IS’ sub-disciplines?

Figure 4’s vertical axis shows the six proposed levels of abstraction.
However, Figure 4’s horizontal axis is a microscopic view of the
disciplines of human knowledge, illustrating the six sub-disciplines of
our Information Science super-discipline.  The figure serves to frame
the discussion that follows.  We will not discuss all 36 cells now; but
eventually we must.

 3.2   How Deep?

The previous section described and defined six levels of abstract-tion. 
So, first, we examine how the IS super-discipline might dis-tribute
across these six levels.  While we’re at it, let’s also discuss how
much relevant knowledge (as depicted by the thickness of each horizontal
band in Figure 3) we have at each level.

Rationale – Our Librarianship students typically understand our
justification better than those in IS’ other sub-disciplines.  We
don’t have very much here, but all of our students should understand
enough Ethics to resonate with the “Digital Divide” and they should
understand how information fits into Maslow’s hierarchy of human
needs.

Framework – Much of the framework that organizes our discipline is
found in a course commonly called “Information Retrieval.”  We need
to develop this framework better, and ensure it’s exposure to students
in all our sub-disciplines, but we have a good start.

Practice – Each of the sub-disciplines described above focuses on the
practical aspects of its corresponding profession.  Since the I-Schools
identify themselves as “Professional Schools,” this is appropriate
and it is our strength.  IS’ various sub-disciplines are appropriately
separated in this level.

Optimization – Our discipline has little to offer at this level, but
it’s included in this list because Information Scientists must develop
this if we are going to be taken seriously by the other disciplines. 
While we can optimize some things in Telecom, the other sub-disciplines
must develop theory by which to compare two Information Systems and
determine which one is better (whatever that means); or IS will forever
be denigrated by our sister disciplines.

Implementation – Our Information Systems are built out of programs and
electronic hardware.  We have little to offer that is exclusively our
own; but that’s changing as the WWW, HTML, hypertext, and other
implementation details are perceived more-and-more as the purview of IS;
and not CS.  Our various sub-disciplines cover this material
differently, if at all, depending on entrance requirements and
students’ skills.

Fundamentals – Our only true fundamental concept is Shannon’s
definition of Information.  But, very few of us teach it and few of our
students have the math skills to understand it, nor the sophis-tication
to appreciate it.  So, the amount of IS at this lowest level is
slim-to-none.

Question 3:  Are there other contributions in Levels 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6?

Since most of IS’ content lies in Layers 2 and 3, the IS discipline is
quite thin and will remain so unless we develop levels 1, 4, and 5 and
try to teach level 6.

3.3   How Wide?

Now, let’s examine where the various levels of our various
sub-disciplines fit along the horizontal axis of human knowledge. 
We’ll do this do identifying the neighboring disciplines at each
level.  This discussion is very incomplete; it presents only a small
sample from the 36 cells defined in Figure 4.

Rationale – Our neighboring disciplines are Philosophy (when we
discuss Ethics) and Sociology (when we discuss Maslow’s needs). What
we typically present is mostly borrowed from these neighbors, but we
should develop it further and we should con-sider presenting this
material to students in all our sub-disciplines.

Framework – Illustrating the diversity of our discipline, this
level’s many neighbors include: Psychology (for Cognition), Business
(for managing information organizations and projects and for
understanding applications in all organizations), Law and Political
Science (for policy, intellectual property law, and e-government),
Computer Science (for databases and data struc-tures), and Literature
(important in Librarianship). 

Practice – While our Information Systems sub-discipline used to butt
up against Business’ MIS sub-discipline and our Information Systems
and Information Security sub-disciplines butt up against Computer
Science, we have succeeded recently at carving out more of our own space
at this level.

Optimization – Most of what we do at this level is borrowed from
Computer Science; although Telecom also borrows heavily from Electrical
Engineering for optimizable concepts like bandwidth and signal-to-noise
ratio.  Information Science is sadly lacking at this level and, as
stated earlier, Information Scientists must deve-lop this level if we
want to be taken seriously.

Implementation – The neighboring disciplines are Computer Science (for
implementing programs) and Electrical Engineering (for implementing
Information systems).

Fundamentals –Shannon’s definition of Information is borrowed from
Electrical Engineering, but we should cast it in a more gene-ral way. 
Since it is our only fundamental, we should consider teaching it in all
our sub-disciplines, even if it means sufficiently developing our
students’ math skills so they can understand it.

While the discussion above identifies IS’ many neighboring
disciplines, it does not discuss the boundary between IS and its
neighbors.  That discussion, while it logically follows directly, is so
relevant to IS curriculum design that this paper separates it into a
separate, and concluding, Section 4.

Question 4:  Not so much a question but, we must fill in details from
all 36 cells in Figure 4.

3.4   Variations

Figure 5 below summarizes much of this section’s discussion.  Again,
it’s not meant to be the final word on this topic, but it attempts to
illustrate the profiles of two of our sub-disciplines and how we might
structure the IS super-discipline if we offered it as three different 
academic degrees.

 

WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?

Filling the Holes

Having described our near neighbors and the body of knowledge we have in
common with them, let’s discuss now how closely we should butt up
against these neighbors.  At each level of abstrac-tion, we observe gaps
or “holes” in the spaces between the I-disci-pline and its
neighbors.  These holes represent areas of human knowledge that are
typically excluded from the academic disci-plines at most universities. 
Many professionals, who graduated from our programs, have filled these
holes themselves, perhaps poorly, by their own cleverness.  Perhaps we
could do a better job of preparing them for their professions by filling
these holes for them while they are our students.

	For example, those Telecom Program Chairs, who are trying to unify the
nation’s Telecom curriculum, struggle with what we call the Physical
Layer.  How well should a Telecom Professional understand Physical-Layer
concepts like bandwidth, noise, filters, reflections, attenuation, and
other forms of signal distortion?  How well should they understand how
signals propa-gate through wires, fibers, and free-space?

Many of us reside in universities that also have Elec-trical Engineering
departments, where this material is taught, but in a general way that
also applies to electrical circuits, power systems, control systems, and
other sub-disciplines of EE. Fur-thermore, when the EE’s teach this
material, they do it in a math-ematical presentation that many Telecom
students struggle with (in fact, the EETs split off from the EEs over
this issue). Telecom students don’t need that generality or
mathematical presentation and EE students don’t need the specific
details in the Telecom application?  So, there is no perfect course, the
“hole” in Figure 6, unless we in Telecom teach it ourselves.

 

There are many other examples; only a few are listed below:

Material on Information Ethics and on the human need for information
could be part of the IS super-discipline; not left for one of its
sub-disciplines and not left for the Philosophy or Sociology disciplines
to offer.

Many universities don’t offer a course on human cogni-tion, in IS nor
in Psych.  Our students need to know how the “human component”
performs as part of an Information System.  And, they would be better
served by an IS approach to cognition.

While the Business Schools at our respective universities might offer
courses on MIS, Organizational Behavior (including the impact of
technology on organizations) and Project Management, these are typically
offered too generally.  Our students need to understand the impact of
information, and not all tech-nologies, on organizations and they need
to learn how to manage projects in their sub-disciplines.

We have similar issues with the Law School and Political Science
Department for course material on policy, intellectual property law, and
e-government.

Our problem with the Computer Science Department is even worse because
the typical CS course on databases and data structures usually entails
far more program-ming assignments than our students need.

This list isn’t complete without saying one more time that Information
Scientists must develop a theory that supports Information Systems
optimization.  And, we should consider teaching Shannon’s definition
of Iinformation in all our sub-disciplines, even if it means
sufficiently developing our students’ math skills so they can
understand it.

This paper argues that the I-Schools should strive to fill these holes. 
But, there are two (at least) problems:

Most IS faculty are very eclectic, but offering this list of courses
will require even greater diversity and breadth.

We get into the very difficult area of university econ-omics and the
pressure most of our universities are putting on us to “joint-list”
more courses.

Question 5:  Again not really a question, but we should compile a more
complete list of the other holes we need to consider filling.

Defining the Super-Discipline

Our overall super-discipline should be greater than the inter-section of
the academic content covered by these six sub-disci-plines, but small
than their union.  It should be some reasonable selection of the best
parts from these six sub-disciplines.  Then each of these
sub-disciplines would be a specialization within this super-discipline.

When we look at the other schools and colleges at our respecttive
universities, we see several models for how super-disciplines and
sub-disciplines inter-operate.  We need to consider which of these
models is appropriate for us.

In Arts and Sciences and in Engineering, about half the courses any
student takes are common across all depart-ments and about half are
specific to a department.

In most of the constituent departments, about three-fourths of what a
student takes is common, and students may specialize in their final one
or two semesters.

In other schools, like Business, the curriculum is more isolated from
the other disciplines.  They may object to this characterization but,
for example, while Math, Science, and Engineering students all take the
same Calculus course, Business students have their own.

The I-Schools can adopt one of these models.  This isn’t much of an
issue for an I-School that offers only one or two of the six identified
sub-disciplines.  But, if an I-School claims to cover the entire
spectrum, or wishes to evolve in that direction, it might organize its
curriculum as a common super-discipline with specia-lizations, or as
separate sub-disciplines with a small common core, or as something in
between.

In SIS at Pitt, we offer these six sub-disciplines, but they have been
“silo-ed” for too long.  We are developing a com-mon introductory
course, to be offered to all students next Fall Semester, and we are
considering a common capstone course.

Question 6:  What is “the right architecture” for the Information
Science super-discipline?

REFERENCES

Thompson, R. 2008. The Telecommunications Curriculum – How Wide?  How
Deep?  In the Proceedings of the ITERA-08 Conference (Louisville, KY,
March 27-29, 2008). To be published.  http://www.itera.org.

Einstein, A. 1933.  On the Method of Theoretical Physics. From Madden,
E. H. (ed.).  1960.  The Structure of Scientific Thought. 
Houghton-Miflin, 1960 (essay originally published by Oxford University
Press in 1933).

 PAGE   

