In the Spirit of Collaborating

by

M. S. Nilan and M. A. D’Eredita

i-School

Syracuse University

Abstract

A field is judged by the questions it addresses.  We believe that the
i-field is at a critical juncture that is defined by increasing
standards for profound, value-added insight as technology becomes more
ubiquitous.  While we see value in focusing on the "I" more than
the "T" in IT, we believe that profound insight will only come through
a deeper understanding of the intersection among human beings,
information and technology.  We see the basic goal of our field as
helping to facilitate interactions among individuals, groups and
"information" through more informed design of technology.  We assume
that human beings are fundamentally social beings and both information
and technology to be artifacts of human experience proffered in the
spirit of collaborating.  We begin with a discussion of collaborating
and communicating behaviors which are inherently linguistic (broadly
cast) and - we believe, by definition - functional in nature.  This
position is logically prior to artifacts or any technology associated
with the creation, dissemination, storage, retrieval or other processing
of “information.”  We argue, for example, that it is insufficient
for our field to bound a domain after artifacts are created – we must
become engaged in the creation of artifacts, specifying how the artifact
will be useful to the user (either at present or in the future), and for
which problems/situations the artifact is pertinent.  If one assumes
an active user focused on addressing their own needs as well as those of
others--as opposed to a more passive stance generally made by many of
the traditional behavioral fields--then insight into artifact creation,
use and re-use will not only result in profound insights into the human
condition, but more informed system design.  We humbly invite you to
collaborate with us in this endeavor.  We feel that it is not only
critical to intensify this discussion, but both timely and necessary.

Introduction

In the twelve years since the introduction of the World Wide Web (April,
1995), we have seen dramatic changes in technology that have allowed for
a plethora of collaborative environments and new means for communicating
to emerge.  This, in turn, has generated a plethora of new artifacts
that we call “information.”   These technological artifacts are a
direct result of specific and ubiquitous human behaviors manifesting
themselves in seemingly distinctive ways.  These changes increased the
salience of a set of formidable and—we argue—distinguishing
phenomena our field is now addressing.  This paper is a preliminary
attempt to re-frame the discussion about our (broadly cast) collective
research agenda around these phenomena.    

Vannevar Bush (1945) posited the ultimate information retrieval
mechanism, which he called the “memex.”  Memex organized content in
a collection based on “associative indexing.”   In his view,
“associative indexing” would permit retrieval based on association
and context rather than strict categorical indexing.  Bush’s efforts
have been seen as the conceptual framework for subsequent work on
hypertext, which is the central data metaphor for the digital age.   We
view this as a good example of a technological focus absent insights
into human or user behavior.  For example, Bush did not specify the
nature of the associations among nodes in the hypertext.  We believe
that functional associations between what information is about and how
the information might help a user is a logical source of insight into
Bush’s associations.  In other words, we believe that the source of
the association that Bush alluded to is at the intersection of the
information artifact and its benefit, or derived use.  The purpose of
this paper, however, is not to specifically criticize or extend Bush’s
ideas or to recast general ideas about a research agenda that is more
about the “I” then the “T” in IT.  Rather, we wish to raise the
question of whether or not moving the focus to the “I” is going far
enough to define our field in such a way that it will lend insight into
fundamental issues like those brought up by Bush over 60 ago.  

Our intent is to explore the beginnings of a coherent conceptual
framework that is derived from a fundamental understanding of what leads
human beings to collectively create, use and re-use our experience when
addressing life’s challenges.  We assume that these collaborating
behaviors are fundamental to being human and are exhibited by people
communicating experiences and understandings with each other.  These
fundamental behaviors inevitably result in constructed artifacts that
are necessarily constrained by the funtionality of technologies designed
to generate, access and disseminate information.  We believe that the
i-field is uniquely positioned and capable of gaining profound insight
into these fundamental behaviors only if we adopt a truly
interdisciplinary stance that incorporates the “I,” the “T” and
the “H” (i.e., the human being) when trying to understand the whys
and hows of creating, using and re-using information.  

In a recent article which surveys the two seemingly definitive areas of
“Information Science” (exemplified by the Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology ) and “Information
Systems”  (exemplified by the Journal of Information Systems
Research), Sawyer and Huang (2007) put forth the following: 

We speculate that scholars in [information systems research] need to be
more explicit about its basic constructs (even to the simple level of
articulating the range of possible ways to characterize these basic
constructs) to more easily connect to, and to be understood by, other
disciplines  (Sawyer & Huang 2007: 1444).

Sawyer and Huang (2007) seek to find common ground among researchers
within the fields of Information Science and Information Systems.  Their
purpose is to gain some insight into how scholars might increase
collaboration both within and between fields.  Additionally, they are
interested in better understanding how to build bridges between these
fields and others.   We believe that their interest in gaining insight
into these collaborating behaviors actually illustrates the “basic
constructs” they seek.  We do not view this as a coincidence given
they are “IS” researchers who have positioned themselves within the
larger “i–field,” which we view as being composed of—at
least—Information Science, Information Systems and Library Science
researchers.   We posit that those who view themselves as being tied to
the i–field share a common interest in collaborating behaviors and
technologies that support these behaviors (see how we define our broad
use of the term “collaborating” below) and that these interests
converge on phenomena associated with these behaviors that characterize
the field.  It seems that it is an interest in these phenomena and these
technologies from which all inquiries into the IT artifact, IT per se,
individual, social or organizational processes, representation,
retrieval, transfer, etc. emerge.  We suggest that the increase in the
salience of these characterizing phenomena are a direct result of using
technology to communicate and collaborate at all levels of an
increasingly intertwined global environment.  

Further, we suggest that one of the profound impacts of IT is not
derived merely from its wide scale adoption, but from the resultant
increase in salience of collaborating behaviors embedded within every
social environment.  For example, we are now able to point directly to a
set of artifacts (e.g., e-mails, IM messages, blogs, etc.) written by
various individuals who are collaborating to solve a specific problem
and validly view it as evidence of a “team” or “community.” 
Yet, not a single face-to-face interaction among their members is
required before doing so.  Those within the i-field are uniquely
positioned to explain why this characterization is valid and why it can
be reliably made across all contexts in which humans interact.  Most
importantly, this brings the field beyond explaining how or why
technology enables this type of human interaction—explanations that
are seemingly self-evident to many simply because IT is becoming
embedded in peoples’ daily lives and business process.  In other
words, the fascination with technology is fading and potentially turning
more towards an expectation of more connectivity.  Beyond the “I”
and certainly the “T,” we believe that IT has worked to illuminate
who we are as humans and that the emergence of the i-field is a direct
result of a common interest in this.  It is insight into who we are (as
a field) that will: 

create the gravitating effect discussed by Sawyer and Huang (2007), 

uniquely define what it means to be a researcher in the i-field to those
in other fields as well as the world, and 

lead to better design of systems and technology (e.g., organizing
artifacts according to Bush’s (1945) notion of “associative
indexing”) which will in turn enable those in the field to have a more
profound impact on the world (let alone other disciplines).   

Our field has dedicated a great deal of time and energy examining
content and its technology in the last fifteen years, but we believe
that we must commit significant resources into understanding human
beings and their behavior from a more functional and purer user-based
perspective.  This perspective differs from those of many other fields
focused solely on behavior—and potentially viewed as being focused on
the user as well (e.g., those within the psychological, economical and
political science fields)—by viewing the user as an active and
creative participant who is actually working towards constructing their
environment as opposed to a more passive participant merely reacting to
their environment.  We are certainly not alone in this view (e.g.,
Dervin & Nilan, 1986; Saracevic, 1997; 1999; Sawyer & Huang, 2007).

There are many ways to re-frame our research agenda.  One is to
conceptualize the artifacts that we call information as byproducts of
various attempts by human beings to collaborate and share experiences
with each other.  Some already under way include applying pre-digital
solutions to digital content (e.g., meta language classification of web
pages), others are uniquely digital solutions (e.g., natural language
processing for “filtering”) and still others are a blend of the
pre-digital and digital (e.g., folksonomies).  We offer a perspective
that has emerged out of a juxtaposition of the so-called
“user-based,” cognitive and social cognitive approaches (Nilan &
D’Eredita, 2005; D’Eredita & Nilan, 2007) and believe that it also
works to illustrate the focus of inquiry discussed above.  

What follows is strictly an illustration of how we frame our research
within the i-field as discussed above.  It is important to note that we
do not view the perspective we put forth below as exemplary of the
i-field.  We believe that the common ground we share with all i-field
researchers is in our overarching assumption of an active user and our
interest in collaborating behaviors and how to realize the potential of
IT to support these behaviors.  It is from our interest in collaborating
behaviors that we believe we can begin a dialogue with any researcher
considered to be part of the i-field as well as those who are not. 
Below, we put forth the foundation of our research on collaborating
behaviors.   We differentiate ourselves from other researchers within
the field by relating information to human collaborating about specific
situations or problems (discussed below).  It is also important to note,
that our anchoring curiosity in specific types of collaborating
behaviors allows us (a linguist and cognitive psychologist by
“trade”) to work in a complementary and fulfilling manner.  From our
perspective, our “home disciplines” only add perspective to the more
important common phenomena in which we are interested in gaining
insight.   

It is in the spirit of collaborating that we present this paper.  Our
primary motivation is to see if others are able to frame their research
within a field focused on all aspects of human collaborating behaviors. 
We begin by defining key terms relevant to our own research agenda, but
seemingly relevant to a number of others as well.  We then discuss how
our agenda has and continues to unfold over time and how it relates back
to the i-field-specific themes discussed at the beginning of the paper. 
Given our discussion above about the field, we continue with some
discussion on the nature of our inquiry into collaborative behaviors in
order to give a sense of the flavor of our discussion.  

Our Anchoring Definitions

“Collaborating” is the social coordination (largely communicative)
through which human beings observe their environment and solve
problems/address their life situations.  Conceptually, Carter’s (1980)
“social Darwinian” description of human existence argues that humans
have an observing and a moving capability.  Those individuals who
observe and move effectively will prosper.  Through collaborating,
individuals can substantially improve their individual observing and
moving capabilities.  Two heads are better than one; together we are
stronger.  It is through linguistic communicating this basic social
stance is manifest, i.e., we inform one another to our mutual benefit. 
The artifacts we generate in this communicative process, however
distorted by structure (e.g., publication or broadcasting constraints)
is what we have been calling “information” (further defined below). 

“User-based” refers to an epistemic position (i.e., what can be
known about being human) that validates the reality of human beings as
they perceive it as a foundation for the design of systems (e.g., a
series of steps intended to solve a human problem/situation/ context
which may or may not involve reification of some or all of the steps as
“technology”).  There is currently a great deal of misunderstanding
about user-based where some believe that we need to understand the users
per se (i.e., the so-called “individual differences” approaches) in
order to fulfill our research agenda.  However, we believe we need to
focus on the users only within the situations/problems that work to both
motivate and engage human collaborative and communicative behaviors and
in some cases, only the situations/problems in which users are engaged. 


“Problem” (Taylor, 1986; Nilan, 1992) or “situation” (Dervin,
1983; 2001; Dervin & Nilan, 1986) is the time/space context for human
cognitive behavior.  These are very broad terms, not to be confused with
the much narrower “problem solving” notions from cognitive
psychology, management, etc.  In essence, the terms refer to a
“chunk” of time/space about which people collaborate/communicate and
ultimately the focus of system design – helping users share and create
meaning to address their situations/solve their problems through access
to resources (information/data; computing functionalities; links to
others, e.g., experts).  

“Language” is the means through which human beings create and
exchange meaning.  This is accomplished through a series of co-focusing,
co-orienting, and collaborating behaviors (Kim, 2003) which serve to
orient one person’s context to the other’s.  Following the so-called
“Prague Functionalists,” a unit of meaning has two necessary
components in this orienting process:  “Topic,” or what I am talking
about and “Comment,” or how the topic at hand “fits” my context
(i.e., problem/situation and any associated goals or envisioned end
states) (Jakobson, 1963).  Meaning is therefore, not exchanged per se
but is converged upon over an iterated series of utterances over time. 
Language as we are defining the concept has nothing to do with the
difference between Chinese Mandarin and American English.  Rather,
language is an extremely broad concept that encompasses all manner of
expressing relationship, existence and movement and it is much more than
merely a tool.  Language is employed to orient other people, one to the
other (whether in a disclosure sense or in a deceptive sense), orient
other people to a specific context (time/space bound problem/ situation,
i.e., topic), and/or to specify individual experience with that context
in terms of values, perceptions of situational conditions, goals or end
states (i.e., comment).  

“Information” is a resource which (we assume) helps the human(s)
involved in addressing a problem/situation facilitate progress towards
her/his/their desired goal or end state.   [Note:  “facilitate”
implies constraint to perception of the environment and/or perception of
movement possibilities and consequences.  A resource that facilitates
may not necessarily be empowering, it may also be inhibiting while a
constraint may not necessarily be inhibiting, it may also help to
facilitate “cognitive movement” (defined below)].  All information
is bound by the context in which the collaborating occurs.  For example,
a textbook by an expert in Alzheimer’s disease may contain insight to
help me deal with a friend with the disease but it is buried in a book
which was structurally constrained to fit a 15-week educational program.
 Since the small bit of information that might help me is not part of an
actual conversation between me and the author, it is extremely difficult
for me to find – there are no co-focusing or co-orienting features in
the text linking me, the reader, to the writer and scarce opportunity
for this to ever occur.   Even when we observe two people in
conversation as they collaborate on one or the other’s
situation/problem, there is much that is not articulated (because it is
already understood) that the outside observer has no access to which
renders any technological recording of the interaction necessarily
incomplete.   Similarly, technological artifacts are necessarily
incomplete expressions of context and, therefore, inadequate
representations of the problem/situation from the perspective of either
person involved.  This in turn presents a difficulty when we seek to
access and re-use the artifacts, especially when they are “located”
in a huge “pile” of other inadequate representations.  Note that we
can posit a continuum of information artifacts, from an artifact
addressing how to make a chocolate cake (for example) where there may be
many possible contexts where a chocolate cake is appropriate, to an
artifact addressing the nature of Alzheimer’s disease where the help
needed by a patient is likely to be different than the help needed by a
relative of the patient.  In neither case is the user’s context likely
to be present in the information artifact itself—albeit a seemingly
more profound issue in the case of Alzheimer’s disease. 

“Cognitive movement” is a central metaphor in Dervin’s (1983)
Sense-Making which is employed to describe the human experience of being
alive over time.  In this metaphor, experiencing life is described as
taking steps (mentally as well as perhaps physically) through
problems/situations, sometimes concurrently (although not
simultaneously) or serially.  Cognitive movement invariably implies
emotive steps.  Cognitive movement is one of two central concepts in the
user-based approach we put forth in this paper.  It is inseparably tied
to the concept of problem/situation.  

“Uncertainty” (Carter, 1980) refers to the aspects of an
individual’s (or individuals’) perceptions of a problem/situation
that are not already pre-determined.  Since change (in self, others,
environment and problem/situation) is pervasive, uncertainty is always
(except with reflexive and habitual behavior) an aspect of human
perception.  Dervin (1983) refers to a “gap” to represent the
uncertainty inherent in an individual’s perception of her/his position
relative to that individual’s movement through the situation/problem/
context at hand.  When uncertainty is perceived by the individual, s/he
can attempt to resolve the uncertainty by sharing meaning or creating
meaning through collaborating with others (either directly through
conversation or indirectly through artifacts of past conversations).   

From a monadic perspective, “meaning” describes the sense that an
individual makes of aspects of the environment inherent in her
perception of her problem/situation in terms of her understanding of the
environment and/or her movement relative to that environment to reach
her goal or end state.  This meaning is based on past experience and
certainly based on past and present conversations with others (either
direct or vicarious).  In this way, meaning can be seen as the creation
of new “sense” (Dervin, 1983) about “how to bridge the gap”
(i.e., addressing uncertainty), it can also be seen as the creative
re-interpretation of old meaning to “fit” new situational
conditions.  Although meaning is created directly by experiencing a
problem/situation, experience can also be vicarious – experienced
indirectly through observing others.  A dyadic (or larger) model of
sense making can help to guide our efforts because the observing of
others’ experiences and behaviors is realized through conversing with
others about the specific context given specific “comments.”  Such
“comments” are rare in most formal artifacts but comprise the bulk
of the verbiage in a conversation (see Yoon & Nilan, 1999).  This has
become even more evident in our digital, post Web world.  From birth,
individuals are enmeshed in a collaborative network of others who
attempt to help the individuals observe and move effectively through
collaborative communicating.  All communicating is through language
grounded in individual experience (direct or vicarious) and meaning is
created by the similarities and differences among individual
experiences.  Much meaning (some, i.e., structural views – e.g.,
Giddens (1991), Bordieu (1999) – would say “all” meaning) is
perpetuated over time through pervasive structurational (e.g.,
historical, cultural) constraint and extended experience with a
situation/problem (or group of related situations/problems).  [Note: 
“communicating” does not necessarily result in the rare phenomenon
of “communication” (Carter, 1980).  So communicating only implies
the attempt to share experience and orientation, not the result].  One
point of the foregoing is that explicit comments in an artifact (which
is much more likely in a conversation than a formal publishing or
broadcasting artifact) allow a subsequent user to quickly determine
whether the artifact will be of any use to him/her.   

“Knowledge” refers to experience with a specific problem/situation
or set of related problems/situations (D’Eredita and Barreto, 2006).  
 We assume the following in regard to knowledge (D’Eredita and
Barreto, 2006: 1824): 

The nature of knowledge is episodic, thus personal,
situation-/problem-specific and acquired through experience, i.e., there
is no abstract or non-contextualized product “stored” somewhere in
the brain.

Experience results from the construction and relating of episodes, but
does not necessarily result in specifically “intended” knowledge. 

The proliferation of experience by individuals within a social context
(e.g., dyad, group, team, organization, community, etc.) is the result
of constructive and collaborative communicating behaviors by which two
or more individuals collectively focus attention, thus collectively
construct relatable episodes—from the perspective of both the intra-
and interpersonal. 

Logan (1988) defines an episode as follows: 

Processing episodes consist of the goal the subject was trying to
attain, the stimuli encountered in pursuit of that goal, the
interpretation given to the stimuli with respect to the goal, and the
response made to the stimulus (Logan 1988: 495).  

To paraphrase Logan’s quote in Dervin’s (1983) terms, making sense
of a situation involves the goal or end state that the individual has in
mind, the situational conditions as perceived and interpreted by the
individual as s/he moves through the situation, and the cognitive
behaviors (especially those that serve to collaborate and to communicate
with others) that the individual takes to move towards his/her goal. 
This entire “chunk” of time and space (i.e., episode) is the context
which is the central focus of user-based research put forth in this
paper.  That we do this by collaborating and communicating (via
language) with others implies that the constructed “meaning” is tied
to social cognitive behaviors among individuals.  

This is very similar to sense-making from the perspective of Carl Weick
(albeit more specific): 

The process of sensemaking is intended to include the construction and
bracketing of the text-like cues that are interpreted, as well as the
revision of those interpretations based on action and its consequences. 
Sensemaking is about authoring as well as interpretation, creation as
well as discovery (Weick 1995: 8).  

Overlap among episodes allows for a stream of discrete episodes to
result in a seemingly fluid flow of experience.  We would not be able to
make sense of our experiences if this was not true (Weick, 1995).  For
example, D’Eredita and Barreto (2006: 1829) suggest the following:    
 

A new episode might be associated (individually and collectively) with
previous episodes because of similar qualities as defined above.  That
there is some type of incongruity results in the most obvious need for
sensemaking (Weick, 1995).  It presents the need for constructing a
potentially unique episode that is congruent enough for it to be
associated with past episodes; or, for it to make sense.  This is not an
abstraction, but a direct comparison made through human-cognitive
behaviors.  Episodes are explicitly related or not explicitly related in
some manner.  In the latter case, previous episodes, however, most
likely continue to indirectly influence behavior whether individuals are
aware of this influence or not (Reder, 1996).  

On the other hand, a new episode might reinforce a previous experience
because of similar qualities.  Here, one can assume a high probability
that newly constructed episodes will be related to past episodes. 
Unlike the previous case, the amount of effort required to make sense of
an episode is minimal, thus allowing for specific stimulus-response
behavior to be optimally reinforced (Wyer, 1997).   	

A new episode might also fall between the two extremes.  This is perhaps
the gray area in which one is said to rely upon previous experience with
similar episodes/ situations/problems referenced by Nonaka and Takeuchi
(1995) in their view of tacit knowledge.  Here, one is simply afforded
the chance to do less sensemaking than in the first case presented while
also being able to leverage an array of previous episodes that are
functionally (or not) similar in quality.  

Note that Bordieu’s (1999) notion of “habitus” can help us
understand scenarios two and three above.  Habitus refers to familiarity
with a particular situation/problem (through experience) such that the
resources of the individual are more oriented towards the present
uncertainty of situational conditions that are out of the ordinary
(e.g., have changed since the last time the person has addressed the
situation/problem).  This is not to be confused with “habit” which
is a reflexive behavior (non-reflective) (Cohen, 2007).  

To juxtasupose all of the above with ideas presented by D’Eredita and
Barreto (2006): 

A robust cognitive and social cognitive set of behaviors emerges if we
assume experience is episodic and is the construction of and
relationship among episodes.  This allows individuals to be practical
and “reliable” (Weick & Roberts, 1993) in regard to behavior …  
Episodes may be constructed given a specific problem, but not
necessarily in a manner that makes them representative of an array of
potential contingencies (D’Eredita and Barreto, 2006: 1829).   

This leads us to assume the following in regard to episodes, ergo
experience (see D’Eredita and Barreto, 2006, for a more complete
discussion on these assumptions which are a juxtaposition of assumptions
from a perspective representative of the field of cognitive psychology,
particularly that of Logan (1988), with that of an i-field perspective):


The constructing and relating of experience is episodic:  Each episode
is associated with one or more previous episodes, but is constructed as
a separate co-occurrence.    

Constructing new episodes is obligatory upon attention:  That which is
attended to is automatically perceived and embedded within the context
of a given episode.

Relating to previous episodes is obligatory upon attention:  Previous
experience directly impacts behavior if a current situational condition
is attended to and is associated with previous episodes in some way.  

“Memory” refers to the ability of human beings to associate present
situational conditions with perceptions of past situational conditions
relative to the current episode.  The associating is not exact, so we
see limitations in the objectiveness of human memory and we certainly
should consider the individual’s criteria employed for associating as
inexact.  The extent to which the associating is based on “habitus”
or inherited criteria and logic represents increased likelihood that
associations made for evolving uncertainty in situational conditions in
the present and future will not be up to the task.  It is important to
note that while our perspective is cognitively slanted, our notion of
episode (given its relationship to problem/situation) applies to context
and both individual and social behavior.  It is at this point in which
we—if we have yet to do so—radically diverge from traditional
cognitive theory.  

We further diverge by suggesting that any notion of “storage” in
relation to “memory” is misleading.  Our epistemological stance
places the individual in the present and notions of “past” and
“future”—thus time—as cognitive constructs that facilitate
sense-making  from a functional perspective.   Simply put, we are not
comfortable assuming the world is as it “seems” to be, but rather
how the world seems to be is functionally similar to “how it is.” 
We assume that the nexus of the cognitive behaviors described above is
that of a neurological functioning organ—the brain.  The physical
foundation from which more abstract cognizing emerges is assumed to be
in a constant state of change as it interacts with the world.   It is
because of this that we see no need to accept notions of “memory”
like that adopted from a (computer-based) information-processing
perspective.  While we assume experience is “bounded” in the
episodic manner discussed above and that each episode is processed as
separate co-occurrence, we do not assume that these episodes are
“stored” in this manner waiting to be “retrieved” or
“recalled” at a latter time.  We view behavior as resulting from
cognitive behaviors that have been shaped by previous experience and as
a response to a given problem given its (and an individual’s and/or
group’s) state at a specific point in time and space. 

Further, we do not assume behavior to be deterministic, albeit
potentially implied given what has been said thus far.  We view behavior
as being tied to experience in a probabilistic manner and to current
constraints imposed by one’s interpretation of the problem (which is
also relatively uncertain and probabilistic in nature).  More experience
implies that the individual or group has a better chance of usefully, or
functionally choosing, or creating steps that facilitate individual or
group progress towards the desired goal or end state.  “Expert,” as
its etymological roots imply, refers to one who has experience. 
Culturally we have cast experts as the ones who can most effectively and
efficiently respond to a specific problem by choosing or creating
appropriate steps.  However, experience is based on past uncertainty
rather than present or future uncertainty.  This past orientation may
potentially limit the expert in dealing effectively and efficiently with
emerging new situational conditions.  

“Creativity” refers to an individual perceiving or taking steps that
are beyond his/her existing (direct or vicariously “inherited”)
experience with the problem/situation at hand.  As such, it is different
from a judgment made externally, e.g., a “creative” work.  Given the
necessary association with the problem/situation at hand, we view
creativity as being best conceptualized as a time/space bound cognitive
behavior rather than a personality-level characteristic of the
individual.  The issue for researchers and managers thus changes from
identifying “creative individuals” to identifying creative
perceiving or step taking given the current collective experience
available (e.g., Weisberg, 1993).  

“Community” refers to the (direct and vicarious) communicating among
individuals engaging with or involved in addressing uncertainty in one
or more problems/situations.  Humans are social creatures whose
development begins (usually) in “families” and is subsequently
nurtured in extra-familial sub-communities (e.g., schools, religious
activities, etc.) which serve to broaden the individual human’s
perspectives from an existential self-centeredness towards (the
inclusion at least) a more social- or network-centric focus.  Community
is defined by the range of situations/problems with which the collective
is engaged.  “Organization” differentiates itself from a more
emerging community in that it has already organized—albeit in some
cases continuously adapting in order—to address a distinctive set of
problems.  In this sense, the more formal structure of an organization
becomes more of a constraint (as discussed above) when compared to the
more informal structure of a community.  This is not meant to imply that
community or organization are simply less or more developed forms of the
same social entity.  However, we do mean to imply some overlap in that
they are a direct—albeit not exclusive—result of fundamental
collaborative behaviors yoked by a set of common problems.  

Below, we discuss how our agenda has and continues to unfold over time
and how it relates back to the i-field-specific themes discussed at the
beginning of the paper.  

A Research Agenda Characteristic of the i-field 

Constraints are logically tied to the problem/situation at hand and the
more micro situational conditions that serve to contextualize the
communicating behaviors which includes any potential IT (D’Eredita &
Nilan, 2007).  If we as researchers move from an individual-as-unit
perspective to something that includes a more time/space bound
problem-as-unit as well as the embedded, and even more micro, cognitive
step-as-unit perspective, we might make some headway in understanding
and managing the changes that impact our field’s objective of
providing access to resources.  {Note: there is an even more micro unit
of analysis common in the Sense-Making research of Dervin and her
colleagues (e.g., Dervin, 2003) which is the “gap” which facilitates
inquiry into very specific information and resource use, resource
evaluation, etc.  A “gap” is usually operationalized as questions
that a respondent has in her/his mind at a particular cognitive step.  A
separate unit of analysis is needed for this fine-grain issue because
multiple gaps are possible at any specific step}.  

As a field, we seek to create or discover patterns that serve to guide
our organization of resources which in turn, must guide information
seekers in locating resources for subsequent re-use.  We argue that
patterns which are derived from the technological artifacts as we find
them are ineffective in facilitating either appropriate levels of
agreement in classification of artifacts or retrieval by users (who we
know won’t “read the manual”).  The technology that produces the
artifacts provides no insight into the logic of this
organizing/retrieving endeavor whatsoever, it is a human behavior that
ultimately dictates the function of any organizational scheme. 
Therefore, to the extent to which we can find patterns (i.e., similar
actions and sequences of actions, rationales, values, descriptions,
behaviors, etc.) in the way people collaborate and communicate about
their problems/situations, we can examine these patterns to see if they
can be employed effectively for the organizing and subsequent retrieval
of artifacts.  There is some evidence that indeed, they can be so
employed (e.g., Nilan, 1992; Yoon & Nilan, 1999; Nilan & Mundkur, 2007).
 We argue that these same patterns may be suitable for organizing
non-traditional resources that our current approaches to the organizing/
retrieval dilemma do not accommodate (e.g., maps, images, people,
places, etc.).   After all, these patterns represent the universal
“habitus” of human survival through collaborating and communicating
which is far older than the mere 4,000 years since the invention of
writing.  And the patterns (e.g., between “topic” and “comment”
or between one step and the next step) represent associations readily
interpretable to users.  

Further, we believe that our functional understanding of these patterns
will serve to inform our disciplinary design of systems and technology
so that we can facilitate the organizing and retrieving of artifacts as
those artifacts are generated.  Note that constraints associated with
design should be viewed as necessarily balanced between enabling
natural—and potentially idiosyncratic—human behavior and guidelines
for effective creation and exchange of meaning through
“information.”  For example, e-mail currently has only “To,”
“From” and “Subject” fields.  As Yoon & Nilan (1999) suggested,
these might be augmented with “comment” fields such as ‘how the
email will help the recipient understand his/her problem better’ and
or ‘how the email will help the recipient figure out what to do at
this time’ and/or ‘why this email is important to the recipient.’ 
The focus in this example is on “comment” and therefore the
functional associations between users’ views of reality and their
movement through that reality.  This kind of association – between
“topic” and “comment” – represents one fairly concrete
association (of potentially many possible) that might enable our field
to actually guide the generation of artifacts that incorporate Bush’s
“associative indexing” as the artifacts are generated.  We believe
that in this way our discipline could lead insightful changes to
relatively ubiquitous technologies that would serve subsequent
organizing and retrieving.  Again, this relatively small change would be
based on insight into the fundamental collaborating behaviors discussed
above and not the technology per se.  

Turning an Agenda into Action

While we emphasize creation, use and re-use of experiences above, here
we will focus on only the latter two, but with the assumption that all
that is discussed below is directly applicable to the design of systems
specifically focused on the creating of information.  Two courses of
action are suggested in regard to use and re-use by the foregoing:  The
first is to generate rich descriptions of the community-based
communicating behaviors and subsequent cognitive behaviors (i.e.,
perceptions and step taking) of the individual community members to
search for patterns.  The second is, based on these rich descriptions,
apply our field-specific experience/”habitus” proactively to
facilitate the direct communicating behaviors and at the same time,
facilitate the effective and efficient use (and re-use) of vicarious
experience.  Since systems (including classification/ organization of
artifacts) have been defined above as “a series of steps designed to
solve a human problem,” empirically derived patterns will inform us as
to the selection of appropriate steps and sequences of steps.  We see
these patterns as superlative examples of associative dimensions alluded
to by Bush (1945).  

Based on this change in focus, the following user-based and
problem/situation-based research agenda is proposed for the study of
collaborative behaviors within communities, but with the assumption that
a similar approach can be applied to, for example, teams:  

First we would seek to describe behaviors within the collaborative
communities that punctuate human lives (intra-community). Rich
descriptions of the communicating and collaborating behaviors (not
merely perusal of existing technological artifacts which are, by
definition, meaning-challenged in-and-of-themselves) and their
rationales (i.e., both topic and comment) can be examined for evidence
of patterns in: (1) effective and/or efficient behaviors (steps); (2)
sets of behaviors, e.g., roles (but NOT as characteristics of
individuals) as functional sequences; and  (3) reward structures and
constraints that facilitate communicating and therefore, collaborating. 
Part of our disciplinary confusion vis-à-vis these behaviors are like a
“fish in water” scenario – we are embedded in social interaction
and therefore find it quite difficult to posit the behaviors as an
object of inquiry.  We believe it to be an imperative initial focus of
inquiry.  The flexibility of notion of “community” is particularly
useful here because it would allow researchers to tailor their
observations to groups with limited ranges of problems/situations (e.g.,
specific organizations or organizations focused on providing similar
products or services).  This in turn would allow us to pursue a basic
research agenda into our primary phenomena and provide concrete
practical insight into the targeted communities.  As we pursue our rich
descriptions, “community” as a unit of analysis will facilitate many
analyses across different communities to get at the essence of human
communicating and collaborating as well as experiment with various
artifact creation possibilities.  

We can subsequently examine similar phenomena in the communicating among
communities.  Of particular interest here is referrals from one
community discussion to another – when, under what conditions, etc.
given the “horizontal” communication engendered by the Web.  We
believe that insight into this specific subset collaborative behaviors
will be particularly useful for many information seeking scenarios in
the digital age.

Once we have adequately described these phenomena and looked for
relationships among behaviors and various use criteria, our collective
understanding of the human perquisites inherent in creating, using and
re-using others’ experiences we can then become proactively engaged in
research and design of the actual production of artifacts which
incorporate these efficiencies to facilitate appropriate vicarious
re-use of the documented experience (e.g., adding fields to
email/voicemail/texting interfaces).  This will, in turn, facilitate
subsequent re-use of the technological artifacts in more of a
conversational manner as opposed to the current topical “keyword”
strategy.  We believe this kind of search interface (e.g., specify
“topic” and then specify “comments” [plural employed here is
deliberate]) will be more natural for the large majority of users –
with no manual or knowledge of Boolean logic necessary.  In essence,
this is what Yoon & Nilan (1999) suggested - the organization of
resources (both communicative and artifactual) within and between
problem/situation-based communities.   Over the (currently unimaginably
huge) hypertext data store of artifacts that tomorrow’s Web will
contain, we believe that this communicative/collaborative framework will
facilitate the sharing of resources within and among communities, and
ultimately, facilitate the effective/efficient access of individuals to
the communities which best “fit” their individual
problems/situations.  

Whether or not you subscribe to Bush’s (1945) “memex” vision, the
potential power of his “associational indexing” to manage inherently
unmanageably huge data set seems logically possible if we posit the
associating as an extension of how human beings help each other make
sense of and move through the sequence of situations/problems that
punctuate their experiences.  Our position is that “meaning” is a
product of human beings actively experiencing the world as they
“move” through time and space.  As inherently social creatures, we
attempt to share meaning linguistically (broadly cast) and generate
artifacts through various technologies either as part of our
communicating/collaborating with others or as an attempt to share
meaning with another in the future who is in a similar situation or has
a similar problem.  The artifacts are what we call information.  We
believe that a useful way (if not the most useful way) to organize large
numbers of such artifacts lies in the association between the active
human being, his/her problem/situation and goal or envisioned end state
and a co-collaborator (either in the present or in an envisioned
future).  

 

In Conclusion

The Internet, and more specifically the Web, has changed the functional
definition of community by illustrating the collapse of the
geographical/spatial constraint on communicating.  Community implies an
organizing principle more intimately tied to the problem/situation than
to a person (or a set of people) per se, which has resulted in a
multitude of virtual communities that are more narrowly focused on the
range of problems/situations that define them.  Along the way, the Web
has also spawned a multitude of types of artifacts (what our field calls
“information”) that come in a seemingly increasing number of
unpredictable forms.  Our inherited logic (so far at least) seemingly
lacks the necessary coherency for the managing of these artifacts.  

Another way to describe the Internet and its multi-media offspring, the
Web, is the removal of many hierarchical or top-down constraints, both
in terms of the “means of production” (à la Marx) and in terms of
centralized organizational/political control (the Web would seem to be
inherently un-manageable).  This has resulted in an immense and rapid
increase in the total volume of various types of artifacts.  This will
continue as various means by which people collaborate freely develop and
evolve.  This makes accurately predicting new ways of collaborating and
what is created in terms of resultant artifacts very difficult (we would
argue, impossible).  However, the constant of fundamental human
behaviors will remain.  They will be manifested in different
technological ways, yet potentially be more exposed than ever before. 
The i-field is seemingly the only community seeking profound insight
into these behaviors through the lens that technology offers—albeit
not formally so.  We argue in this paper that anchoring ourselves in a
constantly shifting bed of technology and artifacts will not lead to
stability or necessarily profound insight into either of these, yet the
proliferation of ways to communicate and resultant artifacts continues. 
This is why we believe a more focused and solidified agenda for the
i-field based on fundamental human behaviors is not only timely,
but—most importantly—necessary.  

References

Bourdieu, P. (1999). The social conditions of the international
circulation of ideas.  Richard Shusterman (Ed), Bourdieu; a critical
reade, Oxford: Blackwell, 220-228.

Bush, V.  (1945).  As we may think.  The Atlantic Monthly.

Carter, R. F. (1980).  Discontinuity and communication, paper presented
at the East-West Institute on communication theory from Eastern and
Western perspectives, Honolulu, HI. 

Cohen, M.  (2007).  Insight from a delightful lunchtime conversation
with Michael Cohen at the International Federation of Information
Processing conference on Virtuality, Portland, OR, August.  

D’Eredita, M. A., Barreto, C. (2006).  How does tacit knowledge
proliferate?  An episode-based perspective, Organization Studies, 27,
1821 –1841.

D’Eredita, M. A., Nilan, M. S. (2007). Conceptualizing virtual
collaborative work:  Towards an empirical framework.  K. Crowston, S.
Sieber, E. Winn (Eds.), International Federation of Information
Processing, Vol. 236, Virtuality and Virtualization, Boston:  Springer,
21-34.  

Dervin, B. (1983).  An overview of Sense-Making research: Concepts,
methods and results to date.  International Communication Association
annual meeting, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Dervin, B. (2003).  Communication Gaps and Inequities:  Moving Toward a
Reconceptualization.  B. Dervin & L. Foreman-Wernet (Eds), Sense-Making
Methodology Reader:  Selected Writings of Brenda Dervin, Cresskil, NJ:
Hampton Press, Inc., 17-46.

Dervin, B., Nilan, M. S. (1986).  Information needs and uses, Annual
Review of Information Science and Technology, 21, 3-33.  

Giddens, A. (1991).  Action, Structure, and Contradiction in Social
Analysis.  Cambridge University Press.  

H.S. Kim, H. S. (2003).  A theoretical explanation of collective life:
Coorienting and communicating.  B. Dervin, S.H. Chaffee and L.
Foreman-Wernet, (Eds), Communication:  A Different Kind of Horse Race
– Essays Honoring Richard F. Carter, Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press,
Inc., 117-134.

Jakobson, R. (1963).   Essais de Linguistique Generale:  Volume 1
Foundations du Language, Paris:  Editions de Minuit.

Logan, G. D. (1988).   Toward an episode theory of automatization. 
Psychological Review, 95: 492-527.

Logan, G. D. (1992)   Shapes of reaction-time distributions and shapes
of learning curves:  A test of the episode theory of automaticity. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology:  Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
18: 883-914.

Nilan, M. S. (1992).  Cognitive space:  Using virtual reality for large
information resource management problems.  Journal of Communication,
42:4, 115-135.

Nilan, M. S., D’Eredita, M. A. (2005).  Organizations as virtual
communities: A sense-making approach for uniting knowledge consumers and
knowledge workers, International Journal of Web Based Communities, 1:3,
262-271.

Nilan, M.S., Mundkur, A., Structuring virtuality:  A user-based example
for e-commerce.  K. Crowston, S. Sieber, E. Winn (Eds), International
Federation of Information Processing, Vol. 236, Virtuality and
Virtualization, Boston:  Springer, 53-66.  

Nonaka, I., Takeuchi, H. (1994).  A Dynamic Theory Of Organizational
Knowledge Creation. Organization Science, 5:1, 14 - 37.

Reder, L. M. (1996)  Implicit Memory and Metacognition.  Mahwah, New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  

Saracevic, T. (1997).  Users lost: Reflections on the past, future, and
limits of information science.  ACM SIGIR Forum, 31:2, 16-27.

Saracevic, T. (1999).  Information science.  Journal of Information
Science & Technology, 50:12, 1051-1063.

Sawyer, S., Huang, H. (2007).  Conceptualizing information, technology,
and people:  Comparing information science and information systems
literatures.  Journal of Information Science & Technology, 58:10,
1436-1447.  

Taylor, R. S. (1986).  Value Added Processes in Information Systems. 
Noorwood, NJ:  Ablex.  

Weick, K. 1995. Sensemaking in Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.

Weick, K., & Roberts, K. 1993. Collective mind in organizations: Heedful
interaction on flight decks. Administrative Science Quarterly, 38:3,
357-381.

Wenger, E. (1998).  Communities of Practice.  New York:  Cambridge
University Press. 

Weisberg, R. W. (1993)  Creativity: Beyond the Myth of Genius.  New
York, New York: W. H. Freeman and Company. 

Wyer, R. S. (1997)  The Automaticity of Everyday Life.  Mahwah, New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Yoon, K., Nilan, M.S.  (1999).  Toward a reconceptualization of
information seeking research:  Focus on the exchange of meaning. 
Information Processing & Management, 35, 871-890.

