Indigenous Peoples’ Rights to Culture and Individual Rights to Access

Kay Mathiesen

School of Information Resources and Library Science

University of Arizona

Tucson, AZ 85719

(520) 621-5219

kmathies@email.arizona.edu



ABSTRACT

Using the methods of philosophical analysis and concepts from moral and
political philosophy Indigenous Peoples’ human right to control access
to their cultural information is defended. The concept of a “right”
is delineated and different types of rights are differentiated. The
method of an “overlapping consensus” is used. In attempting to
articulate the moral foundation for Indigenous Peoples’ rights to
culture, we can start with justifications for limiting access that are
already widely accepted within our society.  These widely accepted
justifications for controlling or limiting access to information include
the claim that said information is (a) under copyright, (b) a trade or
state secret, (c) harmful to some segment of society, or is (d) private
or confidential.  The moral grounds for each of these limitations on
free access is explored.  (a)-(c) are found to not provide an adequate
ground for Indigenous People’s rights to control access to their
culture.  The cultural rights of Indigenous Peoples are defended as a
form of group privacy. Two possible moral dangers of this defense of
indigenous peoples rights to culture are considered.  It is shown that
on a properly nuanced understanding of the contours of the Indigenous
Peoples’ rights to group privacy, they do not give rise to either of
these dangers. 

Topics

Cultural information systems

Information policy, ethics, and law

Keywords

Cultural property

Indigenous

Rights

Privacy

Intellectual Property

Access to Information

1. Introduction

Non-Indigenous Americans belong to a national culture that has benefited
from their past and ongoing oppression and destruction of Native
American peoples and cultures. As such, we share, along with other
colonial and majority populations, a collective responsibility to these
peoples. Thus, non-native persons, organizations, and governments have
good reasons to support any efforts on the part of native peoples to
assert their rights.  One of the persisting harms done to indigenous
peoples is the attempted destruction of their cultures. This attempted
destruction has been two-fold.  First is the attempted forced
assimilation of indigenous peoples into the culture of the colonizers.
The second is the appropriation of that culture through unethical
anthropological practices, as well as the collection and fetishization
of native cultures as representations of the exotic, authentic,
spiritual, or savage.

In this context, the movements of Indigenous peoples around the world to
reassert their connection to their cultural heritage are a positive
sign.  This assertion has already affected the practice of archaeology,
anthropology, and other disciplines that focus on researching indigenous
peoples and cultures. Indigenous peoples’ continued efforts to get
back control of their cultural heritage has and will continue to have
important implications for those concerned with collecting, storing,
organizing, and providing access to cultural information, e.g.,
libraries, archives, and museums. 

On September 13, 2007 the United Nations General Assembly adopted the
Declaration on Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRI) [1].  The UNDRI
asserts group rights of cultural possession and control, which should be
of central interest to those in the field of information.  According to
Article 31 of the UNDRI, for example, Indigenous Peoples have rights to
“maintain, control, protect and develop their intellectual property
over…cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, and traditional
cultural expressions.”   And, according to Article 15, Indigenous
Peoples have the right to redress for or restitution of “cultural,
intellectual, religious and spiritual property taken without their free,
prior and informed consent or in violation of their laws, traditions and
customs.”  These provisions express the ideals behind a world-wide
movement by Indigenous Peoples to reclaim their cultural heritage [2],
[3].

The question for those interested in the preservation and free flow of
information is how to balance the rights of indigenous peoples to
culture with the rights of individuals to access information.  In order
to determine where this balance might be we need a deeper understanding
of the grounds of the rights of indigenous peoples over their cultural
information.  Only if we understand the justification for and the
function of these rights can we understand fully what they may
reasonably demand of us.  Providing such a justification is the goal of
this paper. 

2. THE PROTOCOLS FOR Native American Archival Material AND RESTRICTIONS
ON ACCESS

Recently, a number of Native and Non-Native American Librarians and
Archivists collaboratively drafted the “Protocols for Native American
Archival Material” (PNAAM)[4].  PNAAM describes in detail what these
professionals and community members consider the best practices in the
handling of Native American archival materials housed in archives,
libraries, museums, etc.  Materials covered by PNAAM include recordings
and transcripts of such works as songs, chants, personal or family
information, oral histories, community histories, "myths,” and
folklore; Cartographic Materials of such things as sacred sites or
areas, village sites, territories, use areas; and archaeological data,
ethno-botanical materials, or genealogical data.  

2.1 NAGPRA and Information Objects

Discussions of indigenous cultural rights, particularly in the United
States, cannot be understood without some familiarity with the Native
American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA).  NAGPRA, which
was passed in 1990, requires the cataloguing and repatriation of Native
American human remains, funerary objects, and objects of “cultural
patrimony.”  According to the National NAGPRA Report so far, “there
have been 360 Notices of Intent to Repatriate published…which account
for 118,442 funerary objects, 3,585 sacred objects, 296 objects of
cultural patrimony, and 768 sacred objects that are also cultural
patrimony”[5]. 

n group or culture itself, rather than property owned by an individual
Native American, and which, therefore, cannot be alienated,
appropriated, or conveyed by any individual regardless of whether or not
the individual is a member of the Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian
organization and such object shall have been considered inalienable by
such Native American group at the time the object was separated from
such group” [6].

Some have argued that the cultural patrimony section of the law covers
information objects, such as songs, descriptions or pictures of rituals,
etc.  However, the language of it being “an object” implies that it
does not cover information, which is not typically described as an
“object.” We can make a distinction between an object—such as a
manuscript describing a ritual, recording of a song, picture of a
basket, and the information contained in that object.  Thus, even if
NAGRPA covers the returning of the object, our question is whether it
includes the “return” of control over the information contained in
the object. Compare the rights I may have in a painting and the rights I
have in any reproductions of that painting. If someone steals the
painting from me, I have rights to have the painting returned, but I do
not necessarily have any rights in reproductions. The right in
reproductions may be with someone else, e.g., the artist, or it may be
in the public domain.  While NAGPRA provides us with a model of how
cataloguing and repatriation works, and thus, provides a guide for how
such cataloging and repatriation might go for cultural information,
NAGPRA itself does not presently provide a legal requirement for the
cataloguing or repatriation of cultural information.   

2.2 The Provisions of PNAAM 

PNAAM is particularly laudable insofar as it tries to balance the rights
and responsibilities of both tribes and non-tribal information stewards,
by providing a list of best practices for both communities. It calls for
the creation of relationships between the tribes and archives. Thus,
anyone dealing with Native American archival materials must read and
seriously consider PNAAM.  

To give a sense of the suggestions in PNAAM it is worth quoting some of
the recommendations at length.  With regard to removal or intentional
non-preservation of information objects, PNAAM states that, “Some
items, such as a photograph of a sacred ceremony, or object, or
culturally sensitive documentation of a burial, should not be preserved
forever or may need to be restricted or repatriated to the culturally
affiliated group” [4]. With regard to restricted access, PNAAM states
that archivists and others ought to, “Respect a community’s request
to restrict access to and use of materials that describe and represent
esoteric, ceremonial, or religious knowledge that is significant to the
community” [4].  Clearly, although such material may be in the form of
original documents in an archive, it may also be included in published
works held by academic and public libraries.  Thus, the same reasoning
that would lead to restricting access to archival materials which
represents such knowledge would lead to restricting access to published
works that represent such knowledge. 

3. INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM AND THE INFORMATION PROFESSIONS

A number of authors in both philosophy and LIS have argued that access
to information is key to our capacity to enjoy our democratic and
personal freedoms. Alfino and Pierce, for example, argue that,
“information… in the context of guided inquiry…supports the
development of personal autonomy and personal agency” [7]. Information
Professionals, particularly in the U.S. context, see their profession as
devoted to intellectual freedom and the public domain.  The American
Library Association, for instance, proclaims that, "Intellectual Freedom
is the right of every individual to both seek and receive information
from all points of view without restriction. It provides for free access
to all expressions of ideas through which any and all sides of a
question, cause or movement may be explored. Intellectual freedom
encompasses the freedom to hold, receive and disseminate ideas”
[emphasis added] [9]. These values are also embedded in the United
States Constitution.  The U.S. Supreme Court has held that access to
information is a constitutional right.  “The right of freedom of
speech and press includes not only the right to utter or to print, but
the right to distribute, the right to receive, the right to read (Martin
v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 143 ) and freedom of inquiry, freedom of
thought, and freedom to teach (see Wieman v. Updegraff, 344 U.S. 183,
195 )” [8]. 

This commitment makes any content-based restriction on access to
information is suspect.  A possible case might make the possible
concerns clearer.  Suppose, for example, that a student researching
folklore wishes to access a recording of a traditional song held by a
library or archive.  Perhaps he or she wishes to determine whether or
how this story might be related to stories in other cultures.  Suppose
that, after the library or archive consults with the tribe from which
the story originated, the tribe wishes to deny access to anyone engaged
in this sort of research.  Ought the library to restrict access? What
would the Library Bill of Rights (LBR), for example, advise a librarian
or other information professional to do? 

According to Article three of the LBR, “Libraries should challenge
censorship in the fulfillment of their responsibility to provide
information and enlightenment” [9] It may appear that restricting
access to information because a particular group does not want outsiders
to know the information amounts to censorship. Even if such limitations
are not “censorship” per se, they may still illegitimately infringe
our rights to access information. Indeed, the LBR recognizes that there
are a wide range of ways in which our rights of expression and access
may be abridged and calls for resisting them.  According to Article four
of the LBR, “Libraries should cooperate with all persons and groups
concerned with resisting abridgment of free expression and free access
to ideas.” [9]. And Article five of LBR seems to pose some serious
problems for some of the best practices listed in PNAAM.  Furthermore,
if groups wish to limit access to works based on the ethnic origin 
(e.g., whether or not one is a tribal member), age, or gender of the
patron, this may conflict with the requirement of the LBR that, “A
person’s right to use a library should not be denied or abridged
because of origin, age, background, or views” [9].                    
      .        

In order to answer our question of how to balance the rights of
indigenous peoples to their culture with the rights of individuals to
access information we need to have a deeper understanding of the grounds
for these rights. Only if we understand the justification for and
function of these rights can we understand fully what they demand of us
and what they require.  Since the focus here is on the rights of
indigenous peoples to control access to information and the rights of
individuals to access information, it will be worthwhile to familiarize
ourselves a bit with the literature on “rights.” 

4. RIGHTS

Both those who champion individual rights to access and use information
and those who assert the rights of indigenous peoples over this
information use the language of “rights.”  This is most clear in the
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and
the Library Bill of Rights.  However, it is also a powerful theme in
PNAAM, which states, for example, that, “Libraries and archives must
recognize that Native American communities have primary rights for all
culturally sensitive materials that are culturally affiliated with
them.  These rights apply to issues of collection, preservation,
access, and use of or restrictions to these materials” [4] [emphasis
added].   It will be useful, then, to briefly discuss what rights are,
and more specifically how we should understand the rights claimed by
those advocating access and those advocating the rights to control
access and use of information.

Typically when someone says that they have a right to x, they are
referring to what the rights theorist W.H.  Hohfeld called “claim
rights” [12].  If I have a claim right to read, for example, that
means that others would have correlative duties that they ought to
fulfill. If I have a claim right to read a book, then you may have some
sort of duty to make the world such that I actually can effectively
read. If you fail to do your duty, then you are “violating” my
right. Your duty might be to not interfere. So, for example, in
asserting my right to read, I may be saying that you have a duty to you
refrain from criticizing me publicly for reading the book, turning off
the lights so I can’t read the book, or to remove the book from the
public library.  Or your duty may be to actual in some way assist me.
So, for example, others may be obligated to fund public schools where I
would be taught to read and public libraries that would stock this and
other books.  Rights theorists typically call the right imposes for
first sort of duty on others a negative (or liberty) right and the right
that imposes for second sort of duty on others a positive (or welfare)
right [13].  In other words, if I have a liberty right to read, then
others are obligated to refrain from interfering with my reading. If I
have a welfare right to read others are obligated to provide me the
conditions necessary for reading.

Below I will often talk about the “contours” of a right. It is worth
saying a bit here about what I mean by that.  We often think of rights
as simple—you have a right, or you don’t.  So, for example, if I
have a property right to my car, then we might think of it as a sort of
bubble around my car—I can do what I want with my car—dent it with a
hammer, paint it bright pink, and others cannot do things to my car
without my permission.  But rights are almost never so simple. There are
all sorts of things that I am not allowed to do to or with my car—I
cannot drive it 100 miles an hour on a city street, I cannot drive a car
that pollutes, etc. Thus, my rights to my car do not form a sort of
smooth circle around my car, but rather has contours of what I can and
cannot do in relation to my car. 

Consider my “right to read” again. We often say that we have a
constitutional right to read what we wish—again it is as if there is a
bubble of protection around our acts of reading that forbid others from
interfering with them. But, this bubble is dented with all sorts of
exceptions.  You do not have a constitutional right to read other’s
private medical records, to read pirated copies of a work, to read
documents that contain national secrets, or to read slanderous remarks
about someone.  In all these cases the government is permitted to pass
laws to restrict our access to such works.  Our rights to read have
contours that are quite complex. Given this, the mere fact that one has
a “right” with regard to x, does not answer the question as to
whether one can do some particular thing with regard to x.  It will
depend on the precise contours of the right in question.  In particular,
exactly what actions does the right authorize? 

With this account of rights at our disposal we can characterize what the
potential conflict between claims of rights to culture and claims to
freedom of access.  On the one hand, there is the view that indigenous
peoples have a right to control access to cultural information. This
means, that, if they wish, they may assert a right that, with regard to
certain information, it be destroyed, all copies be returned to the
group, or that, while the information objects may remain outside the
direct physical control of the group, access this information should be
restricted according to the wishes of the group.  Such a right would
place a duty on others to refrain from accessing this information and
may place a duty on the current “stewards” of the information to
ensure that the rights of indigenous people with regard to this
information are respected.  Since the rights of indigenous peoples place
a duty on others not to access information in some cases, this means
that outsiders would not be free to access such materials. 

5. OVERLAPPING CONSENSUS

Many have noted that indigenous peoples have unique perspectives on the
world that provide an important alternative to western perspectives. As
Ermine notes, western and indigenous peoples have, “disparate
worldviews each formed and guided by distinct histories, knowledge
traditions, values, interests, and social, economic, and political
realities” [14]. Indeed, this difference is often cited as an
important reason that such cultures ought to be protected and preserved.
 However, the fact that indigenous peoples have unique world-views
creates a special challenge to any theorist trying to provide a
discussion of the reasons that might support their rights claims. 
Indigenous peoples themselves may have unique beliefs about the world
and their place in it that grounds their claims to various cultural
rights. Non-indigenous peoples should recognize the importance that such
beliefs have for indigenous peoples and, ideally, could learn new and
possibly better ways of being in the world.  Nevertheless, if as a
matter of fact non-indigenous peoples do not share these views, then the
reasons that may be compelling for indigenous peoples will have no grip
on non-indigenous peoples.

John Rawls was the preeminent Political Philosopher of the late 20th and
early 21st Century.  Rawls developed a theory of how principles of
justice might be grounded and justified without appealing to what he
called “controversial metaphysical commitments.”  Rawls argued that
in a pluralistic society such as many of us live in, we cannot expect
that people share the same values, metaphysical or spiritual
perspectives, and beliefs [15].  He argued, however, that in such a
society we can agree on shared principles, via an “overlapping
consensus.” We can each support a principle from our own perspective,
while understanding the perspectives of the others.  A simple example
from the United States context will illustrate this.  Consider the idea
of the separation of church and state.  Both religious and non-religious
people can accept this principle as expressing the idea of the freedom
of conscience.  However, the religious person may be committed to such a
principle on the grounds that persons should come to God as a matter of
individual conscience, which would be interfered with if the state in
any way mandated a particular religion or religious instruction.  The
atheist may be committed to such a principle on the grounds that
religions are all equally false, but given that people are personally
committed to them they should be free to indulge in their religious
beliefs and practices as much as any other private club or activity. 
The religious person and the atheist do not have to share robust
world-views including spiritual, metaphysical, or moral beliefs in order
to share a commitment to the principle of the separation of church and
state.   

It is worth noting that this view is not based on skepticism about
whether there is moral or religious truth.  Rather, it is based on the
philosophical and practical recognition that reasonable persons differ
on such issues.  The fact that people differ is not based on the
ignorance or perfidy of some.  Thoughtful and intelligent persons of
good will can have very different views about the nature of the universe
and the place of human beings in this universe.  In the rest of this
paper, I try to find principles which can form the basis of an
overlapping consensus of both indigenous and non-indigenous peoples. 

6. JUSTIFICATIONS FOR LIMITING ACCESS TO INFORMATION

As noted above rights are always complex. To say we have a right to free
speech is not to say that we can say whatever we want or publish
whatever we want. There are many limitations on free speech with which
we are quite comfortable and familiar.  We often do not think of them as
limitations, because we simply don’t think of certain activities as
being covered by a right to free speech.  Here I am going to focus on
the limitations standardly found in U.S. law.  We we can roughly
categorize such rationales for limiting speech as the following:
Copyright (or intellectual property more generally), Secrecy (including
Government Secrecy and Trade Secrets), Harmful Material (including such
things as Obscenity and Child Pornography), and Privacy. 

6.1 Intellectual Property

The most commonly given account of the basis of the putative right of
indigenous peoples to control access to cultural information is
intellectual property.  The rights of authors under copyright include
the exclusive right to publish a work, to publicly display the work, to
make copies of the work, and to create derivative works based on the
original work [16].  If indigenous peoples hold copyright in their
cultural information, then it would be prohibited for outsiders to
reproduce cultural information, to display it, or to copy it.  So, for
example, it would prohibit a person from placing a traditional song,
image, or story on the internet without the prior permission of the
tribe to whom this song, image, or story belongs.   

The foundational idea of intellectual property is that authors have
rights in their creations. And, in many cases the “author” of a work
is not a single individual, but a group of individuals.  In such cases
the copyright is often held by a collective entity of which these
individuals are members. Think, for example, of the copyright that is
held by the Disney Corporation. The works in question are often the
creation of a large number of persons working together under the aegis
of Disney. Similarly, traditional songs, stories, visual works, etc. are
the creations of individual indigenous persons working together as
members of a particular tribe.  Following the logic of intellectual
property, indigenous peoples would have authorship rights in their
culture, because it is their collective creation.  

There are a number of ways in which copyright seems exactly suited to
the sorts of rights that indigenous peoples claim in their cultural
information.  However, there are a number of features of copyright, at
least as it has been established in the U.S. constitution and law, that
make it a poor fit as a paradigm for the rights that indigenous peoples
have in relation to their cultural information.   

First, the tradition of copyright in the anglo-american context has
always been that it is time limited.  Indeed, originally copyright could
only be held for 14 years with one possible extension [17].  Even now,
while the period of copyright has been significantly extended, to life
of the author plus 70 years, or for corporations 90 years after the
publication of the work.  The idea behind these limitations is that the
rights of authors to their cultural property must be balanced against
the importance of the free flow of information characterized by the
public domain.  Even if we argued that all cultural information should
now be repatriated based on the argument that past publication of the
works were forced rather than a genuine choice of the peoples in
question, any future publication, public performance, etc. of the works
would start the clock ticking.  Indigenous peoples would likely not be
happy with the thought that if they in any way publicly share their
culture they will lose rights over it in one hundred years.  They
precisely do not conceive of their culture as something that can go into
the public domain of the larger culture to be used as persons wish. 

Second, in order for a work to qualify for copyright, it must be fixed
in a “tangible form of expression” [16].  Thus, for cultures that
have traditionally had strong oral traditions where works may not be
written down, copyright would not cover such cultural information. 
Indeed, as long as a work is oral and not written, the copyright would
belong to the person or group who records or writes down a story or
song, not to the person or group who originated the story or song. 

Third, the rights of authors under copyright only cover the form of the
expression, not the idea or story expressed.  With regard to a story,
for example, it covers the actual words used to tell the story, not the
form or type of story itself.  This is even more true for descriptions
of practices. While an indigenous group may have copyright on a
particular description of a practice that they engage in, they do not
have copyright over the description of this practice.  And, unless they
write down or record the particular movements of the practice, they have
no copyright over it if others come to know about it.  

Finally, even if indigenous peoples were willing to accept time limits
(or even if we were willing to remove the time limits in cases of
indigenous cultural information), there are fair use exceptions to all
of the exclusive rights that authors have in their works. No author has
complete control over his or her works.  Others may use or quote from
the work for the purposes of commentary and criticism.  Others may use
small pieces not central to the work in “transformative” uses.  And,
if the use is for scholarly, as opposed to monetary gain, there is more
room for fair use.  It is not clear that indigenous peoples would find
such exceptions acceptable.  It is a mistake to think that indigenous
peoples only object to their works being used by others for monetary
gain.  It is the inappropriate access and use of such information that
is the problem and the inappropriateness can equally be in someone who
is using the works for scholarly or educational purposes.  

6.2 Secrecy—Trade and State

The law also protects the right of certain groups to keep information
secret.  Some of this falls under the rubric of intellectual property in
the form of trade secrets.  There are also laws protecting state
secrets.  Some have argued that trade or state secrets are the right
model for justifying and protecting indigenous peoples rights to their
cultural property.  

According to the Uniform Trade Secrets Act [18], a "trade secret" is:
“information, including a formula, pattern, compilation, program
device, method, technique, or process, that: (i) derives independent
economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to,
and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other persons
who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or use, and (ii) is
the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the   circumstances to
maintain its secrecy.” 

There are features of trade secrecy that again seem to make it a poor
fit for indigenous people’s rights to cultural information. It is,
like other things covered by intellectual property law, intended to
promote discovery and innovation.  The idea is that people will not be
able to spend the time as a group developing new products, inventions,
or techniques, if their work can be taken and used by others. In
particular, the focus is on economic or monetary value that a secret may
potentially have had.  Thus, the value that indigenous persons may place
on some information being secret is not captured in the current law on
trade secrets.                            

Some have suggested that indigenous cultural information is akin to
state secrets.  In one way state secrets seem a better fit.  They do not
focus on monetary value or in promoting innovation.  However, they do
focus on protecting security.  According to the United States Court of
Appeals, "The state secrets privilege is a  HYPERLINK
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_law" common law  evidentiary rule
that allows the government to withhold information from discovery when
disclosure would be inimical to national security" [19].  It is not
clear that all (or even most) the cultural information that indigenous
peoples would want to protect would fall under the concept of a state
secret necessary to protect security. If it is protect the security of
their land, then this may give indigenous persons an internal reason to
have customs, policies, or laws protecting such information.  This would
limit the information so protected to that which could be legitimately
understood as necessary to protect the security of the indigenous people
in question. Furthermore, the idea that certain information is
“secret” depends on the fact that they have not been revealed. There
seems to be little sense in saying that something that has been
published and has been widely available in libraries and the internet is
“secret” information.  Thus, an appeal to secrecy would not provide
grounds for repatriating information.  

6.3 Harmful Material

In addition to intellectual property and secrecy limitations on access
to information U.S. law also has provisions to limit people’s access
to “harmful” information.  Information may be harmful in the sense
that a person can use the information to engage in harmful activities. 
So, for example, we might limit people’s access to information about
the security plans of a power plant or town reservoir.  Information may
be considered harmful in the sense that it is harmful for people to be
exposed to certain information.  So, for example, there are limitations
on how much graphic violence can be shown on broadcast television.  The
idea is that it can be upsetting to people to be unwittingly exposed to
such material.  And, some may even think that information may be harmful
to some (children), but not necessarily harmful to others (adults). 
Thus, the law limits children’s access to certain sorts of explicit
sexual material, while not limiting adults’ access to such material. 

It may be argued that certain indigenous cultural information can be
harmful if accessed by the wrong person in the wrong way. While
arguments that information may be harmful are frequently a subject of
quite strong disagreement and debate, decisions about whether material
may be restricted due to putative harm is standardly determined through
democratic processes as constrained by the Constitution.  It is very
possible that non-indigenous persons will not share the views of
indigenous persons about the harm that could result from exposure to
songs, images, or information about religious practices.  In other
words, the harm justification is unlikely to gain an overlapping
consensus. 

6.4 Privacy and Confidentiality

The final justification for limiting access to information is based on
claims of privacy or confidentiality. Informational privacy concerns
information about persons, which is considered “sensitive.” 
According to Ronald Standler, for example,  “Privacy is the
expectation that confidential personal information disclosed in a
private place will not be disclosed to third parties, when that
disclosure would cause either embarrassment or emotional distress to a
person of reasonable sensitivities. Information is interpreted broadly
to include facts, images (e.g., photographs, videotapes), and
disparaging opinions” [20].

On the face of it, privacy may seem to be the least likely candidate for
grounding indigenous people’s rights to cultural information.  One
tends to think of privacy as essentially an individual right. Indeed, a
number of authors have specifically characterized the right of privacy
as “the right to be let alone” [21].  And the supreme court, in
rejecting the claim of a corporate right to privacy held that
“corporations can claim no equality with individuals in the enjoyment
of a right to privacy” [22].  Indeed, some have actually characterized
a right to privacy as a right to “individuality.”  This seems on the
face of it to exclude groups such as tribes or clans from defending
their claim to their cultural information as a type of right to privacy.
 

However, I want to argue that indeed there is a notion of group privacy
and that it can provide the best grounds for indigenous peoples rights
to limit access to their cultural information.  The value of the right
to group privacy—to control what information those outside of the
group have about the group—is essentially the same value as individual
privacy.  We can find three accounts of the underlying values that a
privacy right serves in the literature on privacy.  We can call these
strands the Consequentialist, the Kantian Liberal, and the Communitarian
views. All of these views provide support for a group right to privacy
in cultural information.

6.4.1 Consequentialist Defense of Group Privacy 

On the consequentialist view the value of privacy is that it allows us
to gain certain benefits and avoid certain harms. Posner discusses this
feature of privacy in an article that in general is skeptical about the
value of privacy [23].  He argues that certain sorts of goods—e.g.,
those that require confidentiality, could not be enjoyed without
privacy.  Some argue that the fact that people find invasions of privacy
personally distressing provides at least some moral grounds for
preventing and avoiding such invasions. 

It is obvious that the group’s ability to control access to their
cultural information will often have good consequences.  First, in line
with Posner’s argument, it will make them more willing to share
information among themselves and with outsiders, if they know that they
can control the extent to which such information is disseminated.  This
is valuable for the ability of the group to have a rich culture and
allows a freer flow of information to the outside.  If the group has no
ability to control the dissemination of information about their culture,
they may be less likely to share such information for fear that it will
leak out into the public domain.  Second, it is clear that many
indigenous peoples find it distressing for outsiders to know about,
publicly display, etc., cultural information.  Thus, limiting other’s
ability to do this will avoid the bad consequences of this distress. 

6.4.2 Kantian Liberal Defense of Group Privacy

The Kantian Liberal view holds that privacy is essential to human
dignity.  In particular, it is argued that privacy provides a sphere of
autonomy for individuals which is necessary for them to live
authentically human lives. If other’s can use personal information
about me for their own ends, they fail to treat me with dignity as a
human being [24].   And, if other’s can observe me without my
permission, they interfere with my ability to make my own choices free
from external scrutiny.  I call this view the Kantian Liberal view of
privacy, because it’s emphasis on the importance of individual
autonomy is clearly inspired by Kant’s idea that persons are
fundamentally rational beings capable of choice and his categorical
imperative that persons ought not be treated as a means.  It is liberal
insofar as it focuses on the liberty of the individual and the
fundamental grounds of our capacity for individuality and individual
expression.  

It is not only individuals, but also groups that may be
“autonomous.”  We can call this “collective autonomy.” 
Collective autonomy is closely tied to the concepts of
self-determination and sovereignty. In order to have collective
autonomy, we may argue that a group needs what Loretta Todd has called
“cultural autonomy.” According to Todd, cultural autonomy
“signifies a right to one’s origins and histories as told from
within the culture and not as mediated from without” [25]. This right
to cultural autonomy is violated when others appropriate cultural
information.  As Todd describes it, “Appropriation occurs when someone
else speaks for, tells, defines, describes, represents, uses, or
recruits the images stories, experiences, dreams of others for their
own” [25]. This idea is closely tied to the argument that Bloustein
[24] makes that personal dignity is harmed when persons are used as a
“means” to others entertainment, curiousity, or economic gain.  In
such a case, a person’s dignity and ability to control his own
life—by having control over his identity, are harmed. In a similar
way, a group that cannot have some control over how its identity as
defined when its culture is used, exploited is treated as a means,
rather than as an end in itself. 

6.4.3 Communitarian Defense of Group Privacy

The Communitarian view of the value of privacy holds that privacy is
essential to us as social beings [26] [27].  In particular, it allows us
to modulate how much and what type of information that others have about
us.  This allows us to form intimate relationships by selectively
revealing private information to some persons. According to Charles
Fried, for example, intimacy requires that we have the ability to reveal
information about ourselves, which we do not reveal to all. Privacy is
thus a means to modulate degrees of friendship ([26], 210-211)  Privacy
provides freedom to define ourselves in relation to others, by not
revealing our every thought. ([26], 212). 

The Communitarian argument can also be marshaled to defend a group right
to privacy.  Group privacy is important for both the capacity for
members within the group to form relationships and engage in various
social and cultural activities, and to modulate their relationships with
external individuals and groups.   The connection between privacy and
the ability to form relationships can also be seen in the case of group
privacy.  Group privacy is necessary for the creation and maintenance of
both internal relationships among the members of a group and external
relationships between the group and other groups or individual non-group
members.   Indeed, Gerstein specifically makes this connection in his
discussion of privacy [27].  He notes that from within the experience of
a religious ceremony its significance depends on its religious meaning
for the participants.  “This means that there will always be the
threat of the degeneration of the religious act into a mere form, a
hollow shell with nothing but its surface attractiveness to give it
value.  Again, the need to deal with this threat from within makes it
necessary to resist observation from without.  The presence of the
onlooker, if it is not met with resistance, makes those involved in the
ceremony accomplices in a concentration on the surface of things at
expense of inner meaning” ([27], 270).  He argues that even if one’s
actions are motivated by noble goals they can be destructive to the
meaning of the act for the participant ([27], 270). “[H]e may well
feel as sense of desecration whenever what was to function purely as
part of the expression of a relationship between himself and his God is
made use of by others—even as a means of learning about that
relationship” ([27] 270) 

7. Limitations on Group Privacy

If we accept the idea that indigenous groups have a right to cultural
privacy, which places a duty on states and individuals to limit access
to certain sorts of cultural information. we are still faced with an
important question.  “Why do Indigenous Peoples (in particular) have a
right to cultural privacy?”  What about other groups such as
Scientology, the Catholic Church, the American Library Association, the
Amish? Do they also have rights to cultural privacy that we have a duty
to respect?  

There are a number of features of the case of indigenous peoples that
make their claim to cultural privacy much stronger.  First, recall that
the function of privacy protections is to protect and enhance autonomy,
individual or collective, and to preserve individuality, personal or
cultural.  Some sorts of entities have a greater claim to autonomy
promoting protections than others—adults more than children, humans
more than animals.  Interestingly, it is because some entities have a
greater capacity for autonomy and a greater need for it that we are more
concerned to promote it.  Some groups have a greater capacity and need
for autonomy than others.  The more “comprehensive” a group is—the
more aspects of life it encompasses, the greater its capacity and need
for autonomy or “self-rule.”  Indigenous groups often encompass
multiple aspects of their member’s lives—spiritual, physical,
educational, political, etc.  Other groups, such as the American Library
Association, for instance, do not have this sort of comprehensive
character. The ALA only encompasses the professional lives of its
members. Typically members will belong to many other sorts of groups,
which will encompass other parts of their lives—family, religion,
political party, ethnic group.  Given this the ALA has both less of a
capacity to be fully an autonomous group and it has less of an important
role in the lives of its members. Thus, such comprehensive communities
as indigenous peoples will require greater autonomy, thus will have a
stronger claim to informational privacy.

Secondly, it may be that there are certain contextual features of some
groups that provide grounds for greater informational privacy
protections.  Two dimensions of the context of indigenous peoples give
them greater claim to cultural privacy than many other groups: their
current context and the historical context of genocide, forced
assimilation, and cultural appropriation.  In the current national and
international context many indigenous peoples are parts of larger states
or cultural groups that are both culturally different and culturally
dominant, there is a greater need for that group’s culture to be
protected [28]. The case of indigenous peoples, indeed, is of particular
note, because they face not just neglect, discrimination, and swamping
by the majority culture, but the active appropriation and exploitation
by the majority culture.  Many within majority cultures do not just
neglect the cultures of indigenous peoples, but try to attain some sort
of false authenticity through acts of appropriation.  Such acts of
appropriation are often also commercializing and imply that the cultures
are “dead” or something of the past, rather than living cultures
within which people find meaning and live their lives.  This
appropriation threatens the meanings of the culture for those who live
within it. This is a sort of threat that is not faced by such groups as
those listed above. 

Given that the last two reasons for supporting a duty to respect the
right to cultural privacy on the part of indigenous peoples are heavily
contextual, it may be that such rights and the concomitant duties, are
remedial, rather than eternal.  While the concept of cultural privacy is
important, it may be that the values of free flow of information are
sufficiently important that when a group is culturally strong we should
strike a different balance from the one we strike when the group had not
had the power to use normal means to protect its culture in the past.  

There are, however, important limits to the rights of cultural privacy
It is important to note that indigenous groups do not exist in a realm
separate from other groups and individuals, thus it is neither possible
nor feasible that they have “absolute” privacy.  What they do
affects others and insofar as they engage with others, there needs to be
some degree of transparency in their interactions and they need to be
open to discussion and criticism.  

In particular, it is important that we address concerns that privacy
claims may be used to cover up corruption, abuses of power, deception,
etc. As Judith DeCew has pointed out, “[P]rivacy appears to be
something we value to provide a sphere within which we can be free from
interference by others, and yet it also appears to function negatively,
as the cloak under which one can hide domination, degradation, or
physical harm to women and others” [29]. Privacy claims may be used to
block any public criticism by arguing that the criticism includes
“private” information about the group. Given this, it will be
important to carve out room for a kind of Whistle Blower Exception to
the rights of groups to protect their cultural privacy. 

Finally, the right of group privacy should not be understood as
absolute. There are other rights of individuals as human beings—as
encoded in the U.N. declaration of human rights, with which these group
rights must be balanced.  Thus, if some practice is abusive of
individual persons, the right that the group has to privacy is
overridden.  Of course, some may object to any restriction on the
grounds that any outside interference will be tantamount to
imperialistically imposing values.  However, the presumption of this
paper is that there are some shared values to which we may agree.  And,
insofar, as the indigenous peoples’ points of view are represented in
the UNDIR, they are committed to the provisions of the U.N. human rights
document.  It is the view expressed in UNDIR that there is no
contradiction between the rights of indigenous peoples and the
individual rights as expressed in the UNDHR, which include rights of
expression and access to informatoin.  

9. REFERENCES

United Nations. General Assembly. 2007. United Nations Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. New York: United Nations. 

Brown, Michael 2003. Who Owns Native Culture? Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press. 

Nason, James D. 2001. Traditional Property and Modern Laws: The Need for
Native American Community Intellectual Property Rights Legislation.
Stanford Law and Policy Review. 12, 255-266. 

First Archivists Circle. 2007. Protocols for Native American Archival
Materials. DOI= http://www2.nau.edu/libnap-p/protocols.html  

National Park Service. U.S. Department of the Interior. 2007. National
NAGPRA FY07 Midyear Report. DOI= http://www.nps.gov/history/nagpra/

Public Law 101-601--Nov. 16, 1990 104 Stat. 3049.

Alfino, Mark and Pierce, Linda. 1997. Information ethics for librarians.
Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland.

Griswold v. Connecticut.  HYPERLINK
"http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?court=US&vol=381&invol
=479%E2%80%A6" 381 U.S. 479 . (1965).

American Library Association. 2006. Intellectual Freedom Manual.
American Library Association, Chicago, IL.

Heins, Marjorie. 2004. On Protecting Children--From Censorship: A Reply
to Amitai Etzioni. Chicago-Kent Law Review 79.

Boaz, Martha. 2003. Censorship. In Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Science, ed. M. J. M. Bates, Mary Niles, Drake, Miriam. New
York: Marcel Dekker.

Hohfeld, W. 1919.  Fundamental Legal Conceptions, W. Cook (ed.), New
Haven: Yale University Press.

Wenar, Leif. 2007. Rights. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2007 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), DOI= 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2007/entries/rights/.

Ermine, Willie. 2007. Ethical Space: Transforming Relations. DOI=
http://www.traditions.gc.ca/docs/docs_disc_ermine_e.cfm#ermine 

Rawls, John 1982. The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus. Oxford Journal
of Legal Studies. 7, 1-25.

U.S. Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 101 – 810.

Samuels, Edward. 2000. The illustrated story of Copyright. Thomas Dunne
Books/St. Martin's Press, New York, NY. 

National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. Uniform
Trade Secrets Act. DOI= http://nsi.org/Library/Espionage/usta.htm

Zuckerbraun v. General Dynamics Corp., 935 F.2d 544, 546 (2d Cir. 1991).


Standler, Ronald. 1997. Privacy Law in the United States. DOI=
http://www.rbs2.com/privacy.htm

Warren, S.D. and Brandeis, L.D. 1890. The right to privacy. Harvard Law
Review. 4, 5, 193—220.

 U.S. v. Morton Salt Co., 338 U.S. 632, 651-52 (1949) [citations
omitted]

Posner, R.A. 1978. Privacy, secrecy, and reputation. The University of
Chicago. Chicago, IL.

Bloustein, E. 1964. Privacy as an Aspect of Human Dignity: An Answer to
Dean Prosser. New York University Law Review. 39, 962-1007. 

B*

#.

Fried, Charles. 1984.  Privacy: A Moral Analysis.  Philosophical
Dimensions of Privacy: An Anthology. Schoeman, F.D. Editor. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge. 

Gerstein, Robert S. 1984. Intimacy and Privacy. Philosophical Dimensions
of Privacy: An Anthology. Schoeman, F.D. Editor. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Margalit, Avishai; Halbertal, Moshe 2004: 'Liberalism and the Right to
Culture'. Social Research, 71, pp. 529-48.

DeCew, Judith. 2006. "Privacy." The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), DOI=
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2006/entries/privacy

