Information Practices to Sustain Knowledge Building:
The Case of the Virtual Math Teams Online Community
Paper submitted for the Third Annual iConference 2008

The sustained knowledge building of virtual groups and online communities requires that coparticipants overcome a wide range of gaps in their interactions, especially in the context of
long-term activity across multiple episodes and collectivities. Here we present an analysis of
the collective information practices of virtual teams engaged in collaborative problem-solving as
part of the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) online community. Our analysis aimed at understanding
the information practices that teams employed to bridged the apparent discontinuity of their
collaborative interactions (e.g. multiple collaborative sessions, teams, and problem tasks) and
exploring the role that such bridging activity plays in their knowledge building over time.

Knowledge Building and Collective Information Practices
Knowledge Building has been defined as the creation, testing, and improvement of
conceptual artifacts (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). In this sense, knowledge building is
primarily information activity (individual and collective) carried out through a set of
practices aimed at developing and advancing a person or a group’s understanding of a
question, a problem, a decision, or any other knowledge gap. Knowledge building is at
the core of many human contexts including, for example, educational settings
(Scardamalia, 2002; Stahl, 2006a) digital libraries (e.g., Bearman, 2007; Fox & Urs,
2002) and virtual communities (e.g., Barab, Kling, & Gray, 2004; Ellis, Oldridge, &
Vasconcelos, 2004; Renninger & Shumar, 2002). Online contexts, in particular, make
knowledge-building more visible and, as such, represent very unique opportunities to
advance our understanding of how individuals, small groups and the larger community
build, evolve, and expand knowledge.
Naturally, knowledge building is a complex and challenging enterprise. Divergent
perspectives often lead to problems of understanding; different work styles can result in
interactional breakdowns, while the distributed nature of joint action over time usually
leads to gaps of awareness and problems of coordination. Discontinuities emerging from
long-term knowledge building have been studied from a number of different perspectives.
The gaps that arise among events, perspectives, and participants have been an area of
investigation in the study of individual and group creativity (e.g. Amabile, 1983; Sawyer,
2003) as well as in fields such as Small-group Research (Arrow et al., 2000; Bluedorn &
Standifer, 2004), Computer-supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) and Knowledge
Management (Greenberg & Roseman, 2003; Ishii et al., 1993). Despite their interest in
this crucial topic, most studies have concentrated solely on characterizing the outcomes
of groups and communities who successfully overcome discontinuities but few
descriptions have been offered of the information practices that lead to such outcomes.
Among these outcomes we can list the existence of “information bridgers” in group-togroup collaboration (Mark, Abrams, & Nassif, 2003), the use of boundary objects in
interdisciplinary collaboration (Star, 1989), the emergence of “shifting epistemologies”
(Bielaczyc & Blake, 2006), and the growing orientation to collective knowledge
advancement in communities (Scardamalia, 2002). Our interest lies in characterizing how

specific information practices are used to overcome relevant gaps in collective
knowledge building.
Case Study: The Math Forum and the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) online communities
The Math Forum (http://mathforum.org) is an online community, active since 1992. It
promotes technology-mediated interactions among teachers of mathematics, students,
mathematicians, staff members and others interested in learning, teaching and doing
mathematics. As the Math Forum continues to evolve, the development of new
interaction supports becomes essential for sustaining and enriching the mechanisms of
community participation. As an example, the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) project
investigates the innovative use of online collaborative environments to support effective
mathematical work by small groups. In the VMT project, small groups of students come
together to work through a special online environment that provides them with an array
of tools to conduct their collaborative problem-solving activity, sustain it over time, and
interact with other interested individuals and groups (Wessner et al., 2006).
During the spring of 2005 and 2006 we conducted two case studies of VMT activity to
explore issues of continuity and sustainability of collaborative knowledge building. In
each case, five virtual teams were formed with about four non-collocated secondaryschool students selected by volunteer teachers at different schools across the United
States. The teams engaged in online math discussions for four hour-long sessions over a
two-week period. They used the VMT virtual room environment (Wessner et al., 2006)
which combines a persistent chat tool with a shared whiteboard in addition to some other
interactional supports. At the start, the teams were given a brief description of an openended mathematical situation and were encouraged to generate and pursue their own
questions about it. Later on, the teams were given feedback on their prior work and the
work of other teams and were encouraged to continue their work.
The goals of our analysis were to understand how teams of participants in the VMT
online community managed the apparent discontinuity of their interactions (e.g. multiple
collaborative sessions, teams and tasks), and to explore the relationship between such
activity and the teams’ knowledge building over time. We employed the approach of
ethnomethodology (Garfinkel, 1967) to examine the sequences of events by using
recordings and artifacts from each team sessions. As part of the phenomenological
perspective, ethnomethodology is based on naturalistic inquiry to inductively and
holistically understand human experience in context-specific settings (Patton, 1990). For
our purposes, we examined each of the 37 sessions recorded, paying special attention to
the sequential unfolding of the problem-solving episodes in which each team participated.
Constant comparison through the entire dataset led to our refinement of the structural
elements that define the information practices presented below.
Information Practices: Local, Longitudinal and Expansive Continuity
Our study of bridging practices revealed a series of information practices which allowed
the teams to cross over the boundaries of time and link together different episodes of

collective action. The three most significant practices documented in our analysis are:
Framing Narratives of past activity as resources for new tasks, Collective remembering,
and Projective Memory.
By framing narratives of past activity as resources for new tasks, teams were able to
construct and use “reportables” such as rules, procedures, or results that had been
discovered in prior activities and construct new tasks for their current activity. In doing
this, participants seemed to contribute to the creation of a team history constructed out of
episodes of interaction and the relevant team members’ biographies. Projective Memory,
the least common of the three practices documented, involved the planning and
configuration of future work out of incomplete work (e.g. missing explanations), further
challenges (e.g. more complex problems), or possible new tasks. Finally, through
Collective Remembering, participants and non-participants of prior activities engaged in
reconstructing past results by juxtaposing past and present resources and, in many cases,
advancing the frontiers of prior results.
These information practices seemed to have one interesting structural feature in common.
They were deployed by interweaving three central aspects of the groups’ interactions:
time and sequences of activity, participation frameworks, and knowledge artifacts. The
temporal or sequential organization of experience (i.e. what was done in a different
episode of activity or at a different time, how does one action relates to something done
before, etc.) provided the underlying structure for the teams to construct a sense of
continuity that was “local” within an episode of interaction, “longitudinal” as it related to
the history of the team, and “expansive” as it projected towards the past and future
activities of other groups in the online community. By enacting specific participation
frameworks (e.g. positioning participants as being or not involved in a specific past
present or future activity, as those who can or should speak about a particular matter, etc.)
teams managed their ongoing dynamic interactions and the creation and management of
knowledge artifacts such as tasks and other problem-solving resources. These three
elements were central to the information practices related to continuity.
In summary, bridging activity allowed the teams to cross over the boundaries of time,
activities, collectivities, or perspectives. Bridging then seems to define a set of
information practices through which participants deal with the discontinuities relevant to
their joint activity. Another way to describe bridging might be to say that they are
concerned with what Roschelle and Teasley (1995) described as the construction and
maintenance of a "joint problem space." Originally this space was theorized as a "shared
knowledge structure" that integrated goals, descriptions of the current problem state, and
the awareness of available problem solving actions. In our case, we have seen that this
joint problem space is significantly distributed over time, across participants and artifacts,
and also that specific information practices are related to its construction, maintenance
and use.
The successful construction and maintenance of a joint problem space constitutes a
central challenge of effective collaborative knowledge building (Roschelle & Teasley,
1995; Stahl, 2006b; Suthers, 2005). Several studies in the field of computer-supported

collaborative learning have shown that the interactional manner in which this
intersubjective problem space is created and used determines the success of the
collaborative experience (e.g., Barron, 2003; Chi, 2000; Dillenbourg et al., 1995;
Hausmann, Chi, & Roy, 2004; Koschmann et al., 2005; Wegerif, 2006). Our present
analysis has shown that this challenge escalates in contexts characterized by longitudinal
activity across multiple collectivities but that specific information practices can be
deployed for teams to manage this complexity. To establish continuity and sustainability,
virtual teams and online communities “bridge” multiple elements of their interactions
continuously a very consequential undertaking that lies at the core of effective collective
knowledge building.

References

Barab, S. A., Kling, R., & Gray, J. H. (Eds.). (2004). Designing for virtual communities
in the service of learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal Of The Learning Sciences, 12 (3),
307-359. Retrieved from <Go to ISI>://000183896600001
Bearman, D. (2007). Digital libraries. In B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual review of information
science and technology (pp. 223-272): American Society of Information Science
and Technology (ASIS&T).
Chi, M. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The dual processes of generating
inferences and repairing mental models. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in
instructional psychology (pp. 161-238). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1995). The evolution of research
on collaborative learning. In P. Reimann & H. Spada (Eds.), Learning in humans
and machines: Towards an interdisciplinary learning science (pp. 189-211).
Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Ellis, D., Oldridge, R., & Vasconcelos, A. (2004). Community and virtual community. In
B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual review of information science and technology (pp. 145186): American Society of Information Science and Technology (ASIS&T).
Fox, E. A., & Urs, S. R. (2002). Digital libraries. In B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual review of
information science and technology (pp. 503-589): American Society of
Information Science and Technology (ASIS&T).
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Hausmann, R., Chi, M., & Roy, M. (2004). Learning from collaborative problem solving:
An analysis of three hypothesized mechanisms. Paper presented at the 26nd annual
conference of the Cognitive Science society Proceedings pp. 547-552.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A.
(2005). How do people learn? In F. H. R. Bromme & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers
and biases in computer-mediated knowledge communication. Amsterdam: Kluwer
Academic Press.

Mark, G., Abrams, S., & Nassif, N. (2003). Group-to-group distance collaboration:
Examining the 'space between'. In K. Kuutti, E. H. Karsten, G. Fitzpatrick, P.
Dourish & K. Schmidt (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th european conference of
computer-supported cooperative work (ecscw 2003) (pp. 99 - 118). Helsinki,
Finland.
Renninger, K. A., & Shumar, W. (2002). Building virtual communities. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in
collaborative problem solving. In C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported
collaborative learning (pp. 69-197). Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of
knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 6798). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and
technology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G. (2006a). Group cognition: Computer support for collaborative knowledge
building. . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stahl, G. (2006b). Sustaining group cognition in a math chat environment. Research and
Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1 (2), 85-113.
Suthers, D. (2005). Technology affordances for intersubjective learning: A thematic
agenda for cscl. Paper presented at the international conference of Computer
Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2005), Taipei, Taiwan.
Wegerif, R. (2006). A dialogic understanding of the relationship between cscl and
teaching thinking skills. International Journal of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 1 (1), 143-157.
Wessner, M., Shumar, W., Stahl, G., Sarmiento, J., Muhlpfordt, M., & Weimar, S.
(2006). Designing an online service for a math community. Paper presented at the
International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2006), Bloomington,
Indiana.

