Information Dissemination and Information Assurance in
Vehicular Networks: A Survey
Prashant Krishnamurthy
School of Information Sciences, University of Pittsburgh
135, N. Bellefield Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
+1 412-624-5144

prashant@sis.pitt.edu

ABSTRACT
Vehicular networks aimed toward providing roadside services
such as traffic alerts, estimated time to reach a destination,
alternative routes, and in general improve the efficiency and
safety on the road are emerging in both the United States and
Europe. Information exchange in such networks occurs between
vehicles (inter-vehicle communications) in an ad hoc manner and
also with roadside base stations using so-called dedicated short
range communication links. Research on technology related to
vehicular networks is being conducted by many universities and is
being widely reported in the mainstream media as well. Vehicular
networks are thus expected to become an important part of
community networks of the future. In this paper we will survey
the different types of dissemination of information and the
assurance of such information in vehicular networks. The paper
will discuss the architecture of vehicular networks, classify
different types of information exchange (safety, traffic related,
and content) and different methods of information exchange
(opportunistic exchange of resources between vehicles, vehicle
assisted data delivery, cooperative downloading of information,
etc.). Then we discuss information assurance issues in vehicular
networks and survey the solutions proposed for ensuring
authenticity/integrity of information, location privacy of vehicles,
eviction of faulty or misbehaving vehicles from the information
network (e.g., using reputation), etc.

Topics
Community technologies and networking
Information assurance and security

Keywords
Vehicular networks, data aggregation, security, authentication

Copyright and Disclaimer Information
The copyright of this document remains with the authors and/or their
institutions. By submitting their papers to the iSchools Conference 2008 web
site, the authors hereby grant a non-exclusive license for the iSchools to post
and disseminate their papers on its web site and any other electronic media.
Contact the authors directly for any use outside of downloading and
referencing this paper. Neither the iSchools nor any of its associated
universities endorse this work. The authors are solely responsible for their
paper’s content. Our thanks to the Association for Computing Machinery for
permission to adapt and use their template for the iSchools 2008 Conference.

1. INTRODUCTION
Over the last four years, interest in vehicular networks has
become resurgent. This is primarily due to the allocation of 75
MHz of licensed spectrum by the Federal Communications
Commission in the 5.850-5.925 GHz range [1] for so-called
dedicated short range communications (DSRC) for intelligent
transportation system applications. This spectrum opened up new
opportunities for realizing a variety of communications between
vehicles – both vehicle-to-vehicle communications (V2V) and
vehicle to roadside infrastructure (V2I) beyond what the
previously allocated unlicensed spectrum in the 915 MHz range
could offer. Such vehicular networks, aimed toward providing
roadside services such as traffic alerts, estimated time to reach a
destination, alternative routes, and in general improve the
efficiency and safety on the road, are emerging in both the United
States and Europe. The large bandwidth that is available also
makes it feasible to envisage other applications such as
downloading and sharing content between vehicles. The
Association of Computing Machinery has organized four annual
workshops on vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) since 2004.
A special issue of the IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications has been dedicated to this subject area [2], and
several other conferences and venues have seen increased research
activity related to ad hoc networks. Not only is research on
technology related to vehicular networks being conducted by
many universities, but it is being widely reported in the
mainstream media as well [3]. Vehicular networks are thus
expected to become an important part of community networks of
the future.
In this paper we will survey the different types of dissemination of
information and the assurance of such information in vehicular
networks. The paper will discuss the architecture of vehicular
networks, classify different types of information exchange (safety,
traffic related, and content) and different methods of information
exchange (opportunistic exchange of resources between vehicles,
vehicle assisted data delivery, cooperative downloading of
information, etc.). Then we discuss information assurance issues
in vehicular networks and survey the solutions proposed for
ensuring authenticity/integrity of information, location privacy of
vehicles, eviction of faulty or misbehaving vehicles from the
information network, etc.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide some
background on the architecture of vehicular networks, the
different standards bodies and consortiums working on vehicular

networks, and other related material. Section 3 considers
information dissemination in vehicular networks, the different
types of information that is expected to be disseminated, the
propagation of such information in the network, and methods to
disseminate and acquire content. Section 4 looks at information
assurance issues in vehicular networks and surveys the issues and
techniques that have been discussed in the research literature.
Finally, Section 5 provides some discussion of open topics and
concludes the paper.

roadside infrastructure may be connected to the infrastructure for
extremely small durations of time because of small coverage and
high vehicular speeds. So the amount of information that can be
pulled from the infrastructure is necessarily limited. It is also
possible that vehicles move into the range of the roadside
infrastructure with some information obtained from cooperating
vehicles they have encountered. The issue then becomes one of
updating the information, enhancing the reliability or relevance of
information, or obtaining information that complements that
already available to the vehicle.

2. BACKGROUND

2.2 Organizations and Standards

In this section, we present some background on the architecture of
vehicular networks. It is assumed in much of the literature that
position information is locally available to each vehicle with an
error that is smaller than that needed for safety applications.

A variety of standards organizations and consortiums are actively
involved in developing and promoting the technology for
vehicular networks.

2.1 Network Architecture
In vehicular networks, it is expected that there will be limited
access to an infrastructure network that will be supported by
roadside base stations. Such access is limited in its nature for two
reasons. First, the deployment of the infrastructure is expected to
be slow and incremental leading to wide areas where there is no
access to the infrastructure. Second, a complete deployment is
expected to be sparse because of cost. The coverage provide by a
roadside base station may be on the order of 200-300m while
roadside base stations may be placed every km or so.
Consequently, not all vehicles will be connected to the
infrastructure at all times. To obtain access to safety or other types
of information, it becomes necessary to rely on vehicle-to-vehicle
communications.

The IEEE is involved in standards related to the physical, medium
access and security issues as well as in defining higher layer
services and interfaces for intelligent transportation. By the end of
2006, the IEEE P1609 standards for wireless access in vehicular
environments (WAVE) had specified the application layer and
message formats for operation in the 5.9 GHz DSRC
communications. The IEEE 802.11p standard [4], which is a
modification of the popular IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi) standard, looks
at issues related to the highly dynamic environment and the
extremely short time durations where communications must be
completed due to the high speed of the communicating vehicles.
Several consortiums with industry and/or public participation are
also working on furthering the development and deployment of
vehicular networks. Some examples are mentioned here. The Car2-Car Consortium [5] comprising of automobile manufacturers,
some universities and the Fraunhofer institute has as one of its
primary objectives, the creation and establishment of an open and
interoperable standard for V2V communications in Europe using
Wi-Fi like components. Some communication protocols are being
developed by the Network-on-Wheels (NOW) group, which is
associated with the Car-2-Car Consortium [6]. Ford and General
Motors created a Crash Avoidance Metrics Partnership (CAMP)
and with the National Highway Transportation Safety
Administration, this partnership is working on projects such as
enhanced digital maps for safety, driver workload metrics and
forward crash warning requirements [19].

3. INFORMATION DISSEMINATION

Figure 1: Schematic of a vehicular network architecture
As shown in Figure 1, vehicles A, B, and C have access to a
roadside infrastructure, which has limited coverage. These
vehicles can obtain information from the roadside base station.
However, vehicles D, E, and F have no communications with the
fixed infrastructure. For instance, Vehicle F will have to rely upon
information from vehicle E, which in turn has obtained
information that has passed through vehicles A and D.
Note that this scenario immediately creates issues that are not
necessarily important in other kinds of networks in terms of how
to disseminate information and how to assure the security of
information. Note also, that vehicles that are in the range of a

Information dissemination using DSRC is quite attractive due to
the large bandwidth and the possibility of using multiple channels.
The IEEE standards propose employing multiple 10 MHz
channels, each capable of carrying 27 Mbps of data for vehicular
communications. Up to seven channels are available in the 5.9
GHz bands and one channel is supposed to be dedicated for safety
applications [7]. The remaining channels could potentially be used
for content distribution and delivery. In this section, we describe
the different types of information that need to be disseminated in a
vehicular network and the methodologies that have been
considered in the research literature.

3.1 Types of Information
It is expected that the large bandwidth of DSRC will enable a
variety of yet to be anticipated applications for vehicular networks
such as Internet extension, office on wheels, P2P file sharing etc.

[11]. The different types of information that need to be
communicated and shared in a vehicular network can be classified
into four categories: (a) safety information (b) traffic information
(c) infotainment and other service information and (d) content. As
discussed previously, information may be obtained partly from the
roadside infrastructure and partly from other vehicles that are
encountered by a given vehicle. In the case of many of the above
types of information, the importance and relevance of the
information changes with space and time [13]. For example,
congestion information that is very far away may become
increasingly important and need a more recent update as a vehicle
gets closer to a congested area along with updates on alternative
paths that may themselves have increased congestion by that point
of time.

3.1.1 Safety Information
Safety information is the most important of the information types
that are communicated in a vehicular network [8]. In 2006 alone,
more than 42,000 people were killed in motor vehicle crashes in
the United States [9]. In fact the primary purpose of DSRC is to
greatly improve the safety of vehicular traffic. For example,
DSRC can be used to prevent collisions between vehicles by
providing information to the driver about whether the vehicle
ahead is braking, if the speed is too high or the distance to other
vehicles or objects is getting too close. Eight safety applications
based on deliberations between government agencies and private
industry have been identified in [10], which are traffic signal
violation warnings, curve speed warnings, emergency electronic
brake lights, pre-crash warnings, cooperative forward collision
warnings, left-turn assistance, lane change warning and stop-sign
movement assistance. Each of these applications makes use of
high level data elements such as acceleration (in various
quantization levels), obstacle direction, wheel angle, vehicle width
etc. (see [10] for more details). Latency associated with many of
these safety messages is crucial. The time taken by the driver of a
motor vehicle to react to warnings has to be considered while
delivering information to him/her [8], introducing the human
component into the picture. The density and environment in which
a vehicle is operating also influence the delivery of safety
messages.

3.1.2 Traffic Information
This class of information primarily accounts for congestion on
current roads, suggestions for alternative paths to the destination,
road construction information etc. that are useful for safety and
efficiency, but less time-critical than the “life safety” messages
discussed earlier. However, traffic information may still have a
higher priority than infotainment or content.

3.1.3 Infotainment and Services
DSRC can also be the mechanism for obtaining infotainment and
location based services (e.g., where is the nearest coffee shop, or
buying a ticket to a movie en route to the theater), using digital
cash for paying tolls, and so on. This could also include
information such as available parking spaces in the vicinity [13].

3.1.4 Content
Recent research work in vehicular networks have focused on
content distribution [11, 12, 13, 14, and 15]. What differentiates

content from infotainment and services is the quantity o
information. In most of the research literature cited above, the
assumption is that vehicles will be interested in obtaining
extremely large files (e.g., video on demand) that cannot be
obtained through a few limited transactions with either the
roadside infrastructure or a couple of nearby vehicles. The
efficient discovery and distribution of large quantities of
information is a challenging problem especially in a dynamic
environment.

3.2 Information Dissemination Methods
Dissemination of the various types of information poses numerous
challenges in vehicular networks because of many reasons. The
size of the network, the speed of vehicles, the patchy and
intermittent connectivity with both the roadside base stations
where they exist and between vehicles as they move, the
significance and germaneness of the information that changes
with vehicular position and time are only a few of these reasons.
Safety information has critical latency requirements [8]. Content
needs to be efficiently discovered and shared. In what follows, we
look at the attempts in the research literature to address several
open problems that remain with respect to information
dissemination in vehicular networks.
In order to evaluate the methods for disseminating information,
models that capture the idiosyncrasies of vehicular networks are
necessary. However, such models are not widely available. In [7],
a large scale simulator of vehicular networks has been developed
and utilized for freeway scenarios. Simulation models for urban
settings that include street layout, traffic rules (like stop signs),
multi-lane roads, the slowing down and speeding up of vehicles,
and attenuation of communication signals with distance are
captured in [20]. The importance of such models cannot be
emphasized. Efficient and reliable dissemination of information
will be impacted by how vehicles are clustered, when they form
and leave groups, how far apart they are under different traffic
conditions, the density of vehicles etc. Realistic vehicular traces
were used with simulations in [21] and the authors demonstrated
that such real traces show noticeable differences compared to
widely used mobility models. For instance, vehicles merge into
groups ahead of them when they are faster and break away (or
split) from groups if they are slower. For example, if al vehicles
are moving to the right in Figure 1, vehicle F could eventually
split from vehicles D and E if it moves faster. Handling such
mergers and splits can impact packet delivery [21] and thus
information dissemination. In [16], the spatial propagation of
information is analytically investigated and shown to depend on
vehicle density, speed etc.
Methods of delivering information vary in the research literature.
Information may be opportunistically pulled from other vehicles
or the infrastructure as a target vehicle encounters them [13]. In an
different scenario, a vehicle carries information with it and
delivers it either to the infrastructure or to other vehicles when it
encounters them, using mobility in addition to wireless
transmissions to disseminate information [17]. This process is
called vehicle-assisted delivery. For content delivery, vehicles can
download partial units of some content and share them afterwards
to obtain the complete content. This has been called cooperative
downloading [12].

In the case of safety information (and certain types of traffic and
service information – e.g., availability of parking space), the
temporal and spatial delivery of information have to be carefully
considered. For instance, it becomes necessary to evaluate how far
the information should be disseminated [8] and this depends on
the traffic conditions (e.g., information need be propagated over
shorter distances in the case of a traffic jam). In [7], simulations of
forward collision warning in a freeway scenario were conducted.
Under the assumption that every vehicle periodically reports its
information, the density of vehicles and their distance from the
target vehicle determined the success of delivery of packets at the
target vehicle. One suggestion by the authors there is to thus
reduce the transmission range of vehicles to improve packet
success probability.
In the case of traffic and service information, aging of the
information with time and distance is suggested in [13].
Information is opportunistically pulled from neighboring vehicles
as a target vehicle moves in a given area. Such information needs
to have a time stamp and a location stamp. As the vehicle moves
farther away from where the information is relevant or as time
elapses, the information is aged and eventually purged. This
enables vehicles to maintain up-to-date information without
taxing memory and other resources. The propagation and survival
of information is discussed in [13] and [16], both in time and
space. Because of the spatio-temporal relevance of information, a
piece of information tended not to propagate beyond a specific
boundary. In time, a given piece of information would propagate
very quickly till it reaches a maximum number of copies and then
it would also rapidly decline from that point.
Recent papers have addressed content distribution in vehicular
networks. The primary idea here is that vehicles download pieces
of files when they have access to the roadside and then share such
pieces with one another. Eventually they all have the required file.
The sporadic nature of connectivity makes this problem difficult.
In [12] and [14], content is partially downloaded from a roadside
base station, which also provides a list of other vehicles that have
parts of the file. Each vehicle then “gossips” about what part of
the content it has. Preference is given to local neighbors to
download remaining parts of the file. A closest-rarest strategy is
adopted where the rarest piece of the file is downloaded first. This
approach resembles BitTorrent [12], but is decentralized and
employs proximity information to improve performance. This is
because multihop communications degrade the performance of
information delivery rapidly as the number of hops increase. In
[11], network coding and mobility assistance (as in [17]) along
with gossiping (as in [12]) is employed with only single hop
distribution of content to further improve performance. A single
hop content distribution is also proposed in [15]. Broadcasting
replicas of pieces of files at the intersections of roads so as to
reach a large number of vehicles is suggested in [22].

3.3 Data Aggregation
As previously mentioned, flooding the network with information
reduces the performance in terms of latency, packet loss, and
reliability. Also, the relevance of information decreases with
space and time. Recently, data aggregation schemes have been
proposed to reduce the load on the network, yet make useful
information available to vehicles that may be far away. In [23],
vehicles first produce a primary data record that is made up of the
vehicle’s location, speed, time stamp, etc. Clusters of vehicles

create a local view and local views are periodically aggregated
into cluster records. Aggregate information is disseminated in the
network. In [24], the difficulty of comparing aggregate
information in vehicular networks is discussed. The problem here
is how a vehicle should decide which aggregate is better to use,
since different aggregates may have included different individual
changed observations. This problem is addressed by using an
approximate representation of data in the form of a modified
Flajolet-Martin sketch, that enables aggregation of two aggregated
data sets, thereby eliminating the problem of comparison.

4. INFORMATION ASSURANCE
Assuring information in vehicular networks has unique challenges
due to some of the same reasons as information dissemination,
namely the size of the network, the speed, the dynamic topology,
the intermittent connectivity, lack of trust between vehicles, etc.
The differing requirements of the different types of information in
vehicular networks further complicate information assurance (e.g.,
latency is an important issue for “life-safety” information while it
is not crucial for content delivery). Only recently has some
attention been placed on the security of vehicular networks. A
discussion of the vulnerabilities and challenges for securing
vehicular communications is presented in [18].
Considering the usual information assurance services, i.e.,
confidentiality/privacy, authentication, integrity, availability and
non-repudiation, it is easy to see how vehicular networks are
vulnerable. Since the location information of vehicles is
disseminated, there is a serious question of location privacy.
Authenticating messages and ensuring their integrity become very
important to make certain that fabricated messages do not cause
dangers to safety in the worst case or cause traffic jams in the best
case. A vehicle must not deny being the cause of an accident if it
indeed was responsible for it, nor should the blame be placed on
another vehicle. Simple techniques like jamming of signals can
severely impact the safety of the vehicular network by affecting
the availability of information. Distribution of content in vehicular
networks raises its information assurance challenges that have
hardly been considered in the research literature.
In [18] a security architecture is presented that provides
information assurance using tamperproof security hardware and a
vehicular public-key infrastructure to provide information
assurance. Privacy is enabled using anonymous keys, pre-loaded
into the tamper-proof hardware, but which can be tracked back to
an electronic license plate if law enforcement needs it. In [26], the
use of multiple credentials to decouple the identity of the vehicle
from its keys to potential eavesdroppers is proposed. This scheme
thus maintains privacy of the vehicle. Public key algorithms and
protocols are however bandwidth intensive (making use of
certificates) and may adversely affect latency requirements of
safety information. Symmetric encryption creates its own set of
problems because of the necessity of a trusted roadside
infrastructure to distribute and manage keys. To solve this
problem, an identity based security framework for vehicular
networks is proposed in [25]. This makes use of Weil-Tate
pairings where arbitrary strings can act as public keys that can
maintain privacy while reducing the number of communicated
messages.
Despite all precautions, it is possible that malicious nodes will
send fabricated information to disrupt the operation of vehicular

networks. In [27], data validation is used to detect such fabricated
information under the assumption that honest vehicles are more
prevalent than malicious ones. Sybil attacks, where a malicious
node can claim to have several identities each bolstering its
fabricated claim, are thwarted by distinguishing vehicles (two
vehicles cannot occupy the same position at the same time).
Position information is similarly exploited to prevent Sybil attacks
in [28]. [29] also discusses approaches to prevent vehicles from
fabricating their position information.
Data aggregation is quite important for maintaining the
performance of vehicular networks and ensuring information
dissemination. References [30] and [31] consider secure data
aggregation for vehicular networks.
Finally, detection, isolation, and eviction of malicious or faulty
vehicles from a vehicular network is discussed in [32].

5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Vehicular networks, as they are conceptualized today, are already
quite complex. However, the applications, and usage scenarios are
unpredictable till such networks are actually deployed, and widely
utilized. For example, the burgeoning of community Wi-Fi
networks was never anticipated in the early days of its inception.
It is quite possible that user communities of vehicular networks
may arise (as against autonomous vehicular communities or
clusters) and people will choose to use such networks in ways that
are unique and challenging in terms of information dissemination
and assurance. Already, content distribution could be a problem.
There are no good mechanisms for ensuring rights management in
an environment with good connectivity, let alone in one with
limited or intermittent connectivity. The evolution of vehicular
networks will also depend on how “open” they are. The safety
requirements will make it necessary to close at least some parts of
the network to ensure limited or no disruption to vehicular safety.
In this paper, a survey of recent research in the areas of
information dissemination and assurance in vehicular networks
was presented. The paper discussed the architecture of vehicular
networks, classified different types of information exchange
(safety, traffic related, and content) and different methods of
information exchange. Then we discussed information assurance
issues in vehicular networks and surveyed the solutions proposed
for ensuring authenticity/integrity of information, location privacy
of vehicles, eviction of faulty or misbehaving vehicles from the
information network.

6. REFERENCES
[1] See http://www.fcc.gov/services for a list of wireless services
and DSRC is listed therein. The link to DSRC provides
additional information.
[2] IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Special
Issue on Vehicular Networks, October 2007.
[3] Roy Furchgott, “Navigating With Feedback From Fellow
Drivers,” New York Times, October 18, 2007.
[4] The IEEE 802.11Task Group p to define enhancements to
802.11 required to support Intelligent Transportation
Systems available at: http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/
Reports/tgp_update.htm

[5] Car-2-Car Communication Consortium at: http://www.car-2car.org
[6] Network-OnWheels at: http://www.network-on-wheels.de/
[7] T. ElBatt et al., “Cooperative Collision Warning Using
Dedicated Short Range Wireless Communications,” Proc.
ACM Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET),
September 2006.
[8] Q. Xu, T. Mak, and R. Sengupta, “Vehicle-to-Vehicle Safety
Messaging in DSRC,” Proc. ACM Workshop on Vehicular
Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), October 2004.
[9] “Traffic Safety Facts,” 2006 Overview Data available at the
National Highway Transportation Safety Aministration’s
website at http://www.nhtsa.gov.
[10] C. L. Robinson, et al, “Efficient Coordination and
Transmission of Data for Cooperative Vehicular Safety
Applications,” Proc. ACM Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc
Networks (VANET), September 2006.
[11] U. Lee et al., “CodeTorrent: Content Distribution Using
Network Coding in VANET,” Proc. ACM Mobishare, Los
Angeles, September 2006.
[12] A. Nandan et al., “Co-operative downloading in vehicular
ad-hoc wireless networks,” Second IEEE Conference on
Wireless On-demand Network Systems and Services, January
2005.
[13] B. Xu, A.Ouksel, O. Wolfson, “Opportunistic resource
exchange in inter-vehicle ad-hoc networks,” Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. on Mobile Data Management, pp. 4-12, 2004.
[14] S. Das et al., “SPAWN: A Swarming Protocol for Vehicular
Ad Hoc Wireless Networks,” Proc. ACM Workshop on
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), October 2004.
[15] M. Fiore, C. Casetti, C-F Chiasserini, “On-demand Content
Delivery in Vehicular Wireless Networks,” Proc. MSWiM,
October 2005.
[16] H. Wu et al., “Analytical models for information propagation
in vehicle-to-vehicle network,” Proc. IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference, 2004.
[17] J. Zhao and G. Cao, “VADD: Vehicle-Assisted Data
Delivery in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. IEEE
Infocom, 2006.
[18] M. Raya, P. Papadimitratos, J-P. Hubaux, “Securing
Vehicular
Communications,”
IEEE
Wireless
Communications, October 2006.
[19] Crash Avoidance Metrics Partnership at: http://www.campivi.com/
[20] A. Mahjan, N. Potnis, K. Gopalan, and A. Wang, “Modeling
VANET Deployment in Urban Settings,” Proc. ACM
MSWiM, October 2007.
[21] V. Naumov, R. Baumann, T. Gross, “An Evaluation of InterVehicle Ad Hoc Networks Based on Realistic Vehicular
Traces,” Proc. ACM Mobihoc, May 2006.
[22] M. Yamanaka, G. Tsuchida, S. Ishihara, “A Replica
Distribution Scheme for Location Dependent Information in
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. ACM Workshop on
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), October 2006.

[23] K. Ibrahim and M.C. Weigle, “Accurate Data Aggregation
for VANETs,” Poster in Proc. ACM Workshop on Vehicular
Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), September 2007.
[24] C. Lochert, B. Scheurmann, M. Mauve, “Probabilistic
Aggregation for Data Dissemination in VANETs,” Proc.
ACM Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET),
September 2007.
[25] P. Kamat, A. Baliga, and W. Trappe, “An Identity Based
Security Framework for VANETs,” Proc. ACM Workshop
on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), September 2006.
[26] G. Caladriello, P. Papadimitratos, J-P Hubaux, “Efficient and
Robust Pseudonymous Authentication in VANET,” Proc.
ACM Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET),
September 2007.
[27] P. Golle, D. Greene, and J. Staddon, “Detecting and
Correcting Malicious Data in VANETs,” Proc. ACM
Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), October
2004.

[28] G. Yan, G. Choudhary, M. Weigle, S. Olariu, “Providing
VANET Security Through Active Position Detection,” Proc.
ACM Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET),
September 2007.
[29] T. Leinmuller et al, “Improved Security in Geographic Ad
Hoc Routing through Autonomous Position Verification,”
Proc. ACM Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
(VANET), September 2006.
[30] F. Picconi et al, “Probabilistic Validation of Aggregated Data
in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. ACM Workshop on
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), September 2006.
[31] M. Raya, A. Aziz, and J-P Hubaux, “Efficient Secure
Aggregation in VANETs,” Proc. ACM Workshop on
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), September 2006.
[32] M. Raya, et al., “Eviction of Misbehaving and Faulty Nodes
in Vehicular Networks,” IEEE Jornal on Selected Areas in
Communications, Vol. 25, No. 8, October 2007.

