“Just Me in a Closet with a Computer”: 

Student Perceptions of Undergraduate Information Technology Programs

         Heekyung Choi

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

501 E. Daniel St.

Champaign, IL 61820

hchoi8@uiuc.edu

ABSTRACT

Many institutions of higher education in the US are offering an
information technology (IT) education program at an undergraduate level.
So far, not many studies about this young academic program have explored
students’ perspectives. Students’ perspectives are important input
for educators to implement an IT education program that properly
addresses students’ needs. This study has investigated college
students’ perceptions and expectations for formal IT education in
college through in-depth qualitative interviews. Interviewees were
college students who were enrolled in courses offered from an IT minor
program. This study has revealed that many college students feel that
there is a void in college education in dealing with issues emerging
from recent developments of IT. The interviewees indicated that the
existing computer science program did not satisfy their needs. Students
perceived that IT is something that they would have to confront in their
future, and sought IT education regardless of their fondness for using
and learning IT. By taking the IT minor, students tried to supplement
their knowledge in their major and be better prepared for the fields
that they would pursue after graduation.

Topics

	Nature and scope of iSchools and iResearch

Keywords

IT education, IT learning, IT minor, computer science, programming,
informatics, student perceptions

Copyright and Disclaimer Information

The copyright of this document remains with the authors and/or their
institutions. By submitting their papers to the iSchools Conference 2008
web site, the authors hereby grant a non-exclusive license for the
iSchools to post and disseminate their papers on its web site and any
other electronic media. Contact the authors directly for any use outside
of downloading and referencing this paper. Neither the iSchools nor any
of its associated universities endorse this work. The authors are solely
responsible for their paper’s content. Our thanks to the Association
for Computing Machinery for permission to adapt and use their template
for the iSchools 2008 Conference. 

INTRODUCTION

Recently, a number of new information technology (IT) education programs
have emerged in U.S. colleges and universities, in addition to the
traditional computer-related education programs. The new IT programs are
being identified with titles such as Information Science, Information
Systems, Information Technology, or Informatics. These programs have
been developed on the basis that there is a niche between IT and the
contexts in which the technologies are situated, in terms of both
further research and teaching. Many of these IT programs are providing
IT education at an undergraduate level, either as a major or as a minor.


While the IT programs in colleges have been gaining popularity, the
identity of the IT programs still remains fuzzy, and the nature and
scope of IT education are still being debated intensively. One reason
may be that the new area of study is still young, and the existing
studies have not had enough time to sufficiently integrate multiple
perspectives from various stakeholders of college-level IT education.

One of the most important stakeholder groups in the emerging IT
education programs is college students. However, most previous studies
have rarely examined what expectations and concerns students have
regarding IT education. Instead, they have discussed educators’ and
program administrators’ concerns in developing and administering an IT
program. Therefore, this study proposes to shift attention from the
perspectives of program developers to the perspectives of college
students to get a better understanding of college level IT education.
The big research question that guides this study is formulated as
follows. 

What are college students’ perceptions and expectations for an IT
education program? 

By investigating students’ perspectives, this study eventually aims to
help educators answer the questions regarding the identity of the
college-level IT education programs. 

RELATED STUDIES

College Students: The IT-savvy New Generation

In a large body of literature, younger generation people are typically
described as more tech-savvy than older generation people. The digital
divide literature has long been discussing the inequality that exists in
people’s access to IT. It points out that people’s age and education
level are two important factors that make a big difference in their
access to IT (e.g., National Telecommunications and Information
Administration [4]; Hargittai and Hinnant, [3]). College students are
considered to be a group of people who have the most access to
information technologies, as they belong to the younger generation that
has grown up with IT and is receiving higher education that often goes
together with intensive use of IT. 

Spontaneous Learning

A significant improvement brought by the development of user-friendly
information technologies is that those technologies have become easier
to learn. Nielson [5], a usability consultant, points out that
learnability, the ease of initial learning, is one of the top attributes
in any good user-oriented system. One consequence of the enhanced
learnability is that user’ spontaneous learning is greatly encouraged.
Many people acquire IT skills and knowledge spontaneously, through
informal learning embedded in their daily activities, rather than
through formal training or written manuals. 

In contemplating how people learn to use computers, Twidale [9] pays
special attention to users’ informal help giving interactions that are
frequently observed in workplaces. His idea of “over-the-shoulder
learning” draws on education theories that students learn cognitive
skills most effectively through informal, spontaneous learning
opportunities embedded in natural classroom settings. According to these
theories, interaction within peer relationships is essential when
students learn complex cognitive skills (e.g., Vygotsky [10]; Rogoff,
[6]). Other researchers, such as Spliter [8], also point out that a
critical part of IT learning usually occurs in users’ social
interaction with peers rather than through formal training.

The Place for Formal IT Education in College

As discussed above, college students are very active users of IT, and
they acquire IT competency spontaneously in their daily lives rather
than through any formal training. Previous studies suggest that the
immediate value that learners attach to learning computers should be
considered in thinking about IT education. Facer, Sutherland, Furlong
and Furlong [2] point out that there is a fundamental gap between the
reason that educators and parents place emphasis on computer education
and the reason that children value computer expertise. They argue that
while policy makers and parents tend to view computer skills in terms of
the children’s adaptability to the future world of work, the actual
reason that young children value IT expertise is that obtaining the
expertise is instrumental in shaping their identity among their peer
groups. 

College students have different values from those of young children who
are the target of Facer et al.’ [2] study. College students are
situated in a transitioning period from education to “the real
world”. Therefore, college years are the time when career-related
decisions are important to students. Developmental psychologist Smolak
[7] argues that occupation-related values are a significant part of
college students’ identity formation. It implies that the reason that
college students seek formal IT education may be closely related to
their career-related issues. Also, many related studies have focused on
computer skills, rather than on broad IT education which includes many
conceptual parts of IT knowledge other than just computer skills. 

If college students are generally savvy with information technologies,
and they acquire IT competency more through informal paths, then what
would be the place for formal IT education for them? What do they think
they are not good at, and what causes them to consider formal IT
education? 

METHODOLOGY

As the development of the college-level IT programs is a new phenomenon
and students’ perceptions on these programs have rarely been studied,
there is no strong theoretical framework that can guide this study to
answer the research question. This lack of a strong research framework
requires some exploratory research that identifies the major issues
first. In this study, this exploratory research was performed through
qualitative in-depth interviewing with college students. 

Interview participants were college students who were enrolled in one or
more courses in the IT minor program in a large Midwestern university.
The purposive sampling method has been adopted to obtain participants
from various majors. Enrollment in an IT class was taken as an
indication of students’ interest in IT education. A total of 26
students from the following majors were interviewed: English, History,
Advertising, Sociology, Business Administration, Computer Science,
Computer Engineering, Chemical Engineering, etc. Interviewees included
15 male students and 11 female students. 3 sophomores, 8 juniors, and 15
senior students were interviewed. There were no freshman students, as
the IT classes require sophomore standing. For confidentiality,
pseudonyms were used to identify the interview participants throughout
the study. 

Interviews were performed during the Spring 2007 and Fall 2007
semesters. Students in the IT classes were given a brief introduction to
the study and asked to sign up for an interview session. Each interview
session lasted about an hour. The interviews were conducted in a
semi-structured format. The semi-structured format allowed the
interviewer to adjust interview questions flexibly to get in-depth
understanding of each interviewee’s experiences with IT and meanings
that they attach to IT education. 

FINDINGS

Major Interests in IT Education

From the interview data, three major areas of interest that college
students have about IT education were identified. 

Learning practical hands-on IT skills

The interview data revealed that one big interest that college students
have regarding IT education is learning practical hands-on IT skills. IT
broadly means any type of digital technology that processes information.
But to students, IT in the context of college education primarily means
computers, rather than other popular consumer IT devices such as cell
phones and music players. It seems that their interest in personal
computers is related to creating practical digital artifacts on their
own. These digital artifacts include their personal web pages,
portfolios for jobs, and tools to support the groups that they belong
to. Emily, a psychology student, expressed how excited she was when she
learned some practical hands-on IT skills from an IT class.

Emily: The things that we created in the class, it was something that
actually worked and could actually be used. We created things that I
feel that we accomplished something, which is kind of cool. 

Creating something on computers usually involves programming. However,
students clearly indicated that what they are interested in is not the
programming per se, which CS people would do. Their interest in
programming is limited to some types of Web programming that are needed
to make their own stuff. 

 

Figure 1. Interests in learning practical hands-on IT skills

Learning about social implications of IT

Students also showed interest in learning about implications of IT use
on people and society. They are interested in learning how people use
IT, and what implications IT use has for society, but not necessarily
interested in using IT products proficiently or learning hands-on IT
skills. Two students, from English and Business respectively, described
their interest in learning the social implications of IT implementation.


Jenna: My expectations were not so much relating IT classes to technical
stuff…but more relating it to culture… and current events more like,
how the computers have evolved…. All I really thought about it was, I
didn’t really think it would be too technical.

Rachel: I’ve always liked learning about technologies and liked how
people use it and how it affects people. I don’t necessarily like
using technology itself. I took a class last semester…. It was a
communications class, and it was a lot about TV, Internet, and different
types of media and how they affect society and different groups and
different stereotypes.. I thought it was interesting. So I thought that
the IT minor is fairly similar to that. 

These comments indicate that even students who are not very active in
using IT products feel the need for some kind of IT education. Their
focus on the impact of IT is clearly different from the focus of the
established approaches of CS or other engineering fields. 

Interest in Human-Computer Interaction 

Human-computer interaction (HCI) is another area that many students
showed interest in regarding IT education. Chris, a philosophy major,
focuses on computers less as technologies, but more as people’s tools
for communicating. 

Chris: I am more interested in computing as interaction, less than
computing as a goal and end itself. If people are interested in studying
how people interact with computers, how computers shape their lives, the
IT program is an ideal place to investigate some of that knowledge.

Students perceive HCI as an important issue to pursue in higher
education, because it is related to many current changes in society. 

Jack: That class [Design Information Interfaces] was very helpful,
because I think a lot of things are either on the web right now or going
in that direction. I think usability is really important because I’ve
been on so many websites, not being able to find a button or not knowing
where to click, and that’s one of the big issues, it just does not
allow people design for usability.

Some students also view HCI as a gateway through which non-technical
students can get into the study of IT. 

Jenna: Because I am not really very experienced with computers, I asked
the IT advisor what classes would be less technical, and more underlines
of computers and culture, human interaction with computers… 

It seems that HCI is a major area of IT education. By HCI, students mean
not a narrowly defined sub-area of IT, but rather people’s interaction
with computers in a broad sense. 

Patterns found among the major interests

Interesting patterns were found among the major interests. The first two
interests, interest in learning hands-on IT skills and interest in
learning social implications, tended to be negatively correlated. Those
who were more interested in acquiring practical hands-on computing stuff
tended to be less interested in discussing social implications of IT.
Those who showed more interest in learning about social implications of
IT tended to be less interested in learning technical stuff. Also, some
common underlying interests were found in all three interests. First,
most of the students showed interested in the practical aspects of IT
education. Second, all the three interests were focused around
user-level issues; students take IT classes to learn to make their
websites, to make their own portfolio, to conduct their group project,
or to learn how IT implementation affects end-users like themselves. 

“I am not good at computers”: Conflicting Attitude towards their IT
competency

Many students had conflicting attitudes regarding their IT competency.
While they said they use IT all the time for their school work and
socializing purposes, many of them rated their overall competency in
using IT not very high, with a comment like “I am not good at
computers”. It seems that their intensive use of computers for school
work and social purposes does not count as IT competency for them. A lot
of times the feeling of incompetence came from their inability to do
programming. 

Jack: Technology, I do utilize it a lot. I think I’m pretty familiar
with a lot of the IT technology in terms of the social use… utilizing
different technologies…. The one thing that I don’t feel comfortable
with is the coding itself. 

It is noteworthy that students did not describe their IT competency as a
standalone technical skill without a context. Most times, students
described their IT competency in relation to some area expertise. For
example, a journalism student Abby indicated that she is not competent
to sit down and write a program by herself, but that her IT skills would
be good enough to perform her work in the journalism area. 

Abby: For the future, I’ll need to know more about online journalism.
But could I sit down and make a web page, no, I think I would need more
interaction. I think I have enough base knowledge to accomplish anything
that I would want to accomplish.. if I want to learn more, I could
figure it out on my own without struggling too much. 

It seems that students feel that their IT competency is good enough if
their IT skills and knowledge are functional in performing what they
need to do. 

Perceptions about the Existing CS Program

The interview data revealed that many of the interviewees have some sort
of interest in learning issues in computing. As a result, many students
have taken or considered taking a CS class. Most students reported that
the CS classes they tried did not satisfy their needs. 

First, students generally perceived that computer science is very hard.
CS classes are usually considered to be hard, because they require a lot
of math background. Some students pointed out that CS classes are
daunting even for people who already have some level of technical
competency outside of class. 

Chris: I joined the university with very sporadic knowledge of
computing. I had fairly good knowledge of coding and software
systems.… However, computer programming courses in computer science
department are notorious, being exceedingly difficult even for people
who already know the basics of the programming.

Students also commented that the class atmosphere of CS classes is not
very friendly to novices and less-experienced people.

Second, the negative stereotype of CS work influences students’
perceptions of CS education. Many students believed that CS work
typically requires long hours of working alone with tedious tasks, and
pointed to this as a very unattractive aspect of learning programming. 

Dave: Programming is a good skill to have. It’s not something like for
sure going for career, no way. I thought it’s too dull for me
personally, because it’s solitary. I feel like I have more social
skills, I would rather talk and interact with people on group work, than
have just me in a closet with a computer.

Third, they feel that what is being taught in CS is very theoretical
rather than practical. They pointed out that CS classes typically
require designing everything from scratch and producing outcomes that
are not immediately usable. This is not practical for most students who
are not CS majors, because the CS way of programming is not only hard
for them, but also takes a lot longer time than necessary to get what
they want. 

Kelly: My friends have had taken them, they come home talking about
their really arbitrary assignments, things that are not gonna help them.
I didn’t want to deal with those assignments. I want to learn how to
really get end up and do something that I can actually physically use,
create a product. I know that you need to learn that in order to get to
that. But that’s not what I need….

Lastly, some students expressed their concern that CS does not consider
the impacts of computing on human life.

Chris: One of the things that I found which is really good about the IT
program was that it really focuses more on the interaction between
people and computers, instead of just the very low-level programming
aspect, which is something that I really missed in the computer science
department. There wasn’t really anything that computer science can
offer me that I was really looking for. 

Students’ comments about the CS program indicated that the focus of
existing computing education does not go very well with non-CS
students’ needs for computing education. 

Perceived Gap in College Education

Students reported that they feel some gap in current college education
in terms of education for IT. First, students pointed out that most
existing academic programs are very theory-based and not practical.
Nathan is a computer engineering major. He described his experience that
all the theoretical knowledge that he had obtained from his study was
not very useful in performing his work assignment.

Nathan: I do like a lot of practical things, and am not real big into
studying theories. I don’t mind studying a theory to get an
understanding of how software program works, like the course I had last
semester, we used a computer design tool to help us lay-out a processor.
So we actually made our own little processors, and one of things you had
to connect a bunch of different wires between all these different little
pins. If you do it manually, you will have a really big problem, you can
use a choice of different algorithms to automatically do it for you. So
I learned about different algorithms in class and used them in a
practical way. That’s about the technology that I’d like… where I
can say “All right, I can use this.” “Here’s an algorithm, you
will use it maybe!” I am like, “okay…” Because I am not really
big into theory, and just kind of good at research on that algorithm,
it’s not all that useful…

Second, students commented that most academic programs focus on
“history”, and are slow at embracing issues of current affairs and
recent developments. This complaint appears over a wide range of
academic disciplines. 

Dave, a political science major, mentions that political science deals
more with historical stuff than the changes that he is experiencing
right now. 

Dave: Courses in my major deal a whole lot of government stuff, seem
more of just history, looking back at the history of government. While
in this [IT] course, I feel like what we are studying is going right
now. I enjoy that, because it’s something that I feel like I am in
actually a part of, because I am participating on the Internet which
mostly these classes talk about, and how information is shared through
different chat. I feel like it’s not just studying the past... it’s
studying now. 

Another criticism was that there are rigid boundaries among existing
disciplinary programs across campus. Many classes are open only to the
students enrolled in a specific program. Many social science classes
deal with IT issues at an upper-undergraduate level. These upper-level
courses usually require several prerequisite courses within a specific
discipline. There is no social science class that is entirely devoted to
discussions about IT. 

Zachary, a CS major, is taking an IT course that fulfills his general
education requirements for social sciences. He is very much into his
study in CS, and is also interested in different kinds of discussion
about computers and other technologies. As he did not want to go too far
away from technical issues when choosing social science courses for his
general education requirements, he decided to pick two IT courses that
satisfy the general education requirements. He found that it is
difficult to find such courses from other social science disciplines,
because other disciplines usually offer technology-related courses only
at a higher level for junior and senior students in their fields. 

Zachary: [If I am looking for a social science course that deals with
IT,] that’ll be five courses to get to anything that really about
computers instead of two [introductory IT] courses. 

As IT is increasingly being adopted in many settings in everyday life,
students do have some sort of sense that there might be some education
program on IT on campus, even without explicit knowledge. This is
expressed in the conversation with Brad, an economics major who is not
very fond of working with IT. 

Heekyung: Did you know that there is an IT minor on campus?

Brad: I guess I would’ve…. I don’t know explicitly, but I figured
that there would be…IT isn’t something that I’m extremely
interested in, so I wouldn’t have considered it, I wouldn’t look
into finding whether there was, but yeah, I guess I didn’t. Not
explicitly, but I would have if it was something I was interested in, I
would have figured that you can you can get an IT minor. I had this
feeling that there is something like an IT minor on campus….  I
figured it would be there, but I didn’t actually know. 

It seems that their perceived needs for IT education have to do with
their perceived gap in current college education.

Reasons for Choosing the IT minor

While students choose their major based on what they like and what they
are good at, the interview data showed that students choose the IT minor
because of its practical value that IT education bears to them. 

A few students reported that they chose IT courses because they
generally like to work with IT. However, for many other students, IT is
something that they will have to acquire knowledge about for their
future, whether they like it or not, or whether they are good at dealing
with it or not. Many students from various majors, from English to
Computer Science, commonly perceive that IT is not very exciting, but
something that they will need to learn eventually for their future life
beyond education.

Kate, a humanities student, has been hesitant to embrace new technical
things since she was young. However, she feels that it is something that
she would need to confront in developing her future career anyway. Kate
repeated that learning IT is very hard for her, indicating that she is
taking the IT minor for its instrumental value, not because of her
fondness of what is being taught in IT education. 

Kate: Technical things are hard, but worth learning. Especially I am
coming into the graduate school of library and information science next
year, so I know that I am gonna need to know things about Internet and
technology. It’s just hard. It’s hard for me. 

Zachary, a CS major, also talks about the need to learn about IT
regardless of his willingness to stick to a CS job. In his mind, a CS
job is a job that focuses on programming, as opposed to an IT job, which
is more about providing technical support to other people. 

Zachary: I know I am most likely ending up with being a coder somewhere.
I will have to use code repositories, knowledge bases… a lot of tech
support things. They put that in a repository. 

Students said that they chose the IT minor because they believed the
study of IT supplements their major field well. Abby, a journalism
major, explained her need to learn IT to be up front in her area of
study. 

Abby: I feel like it [the IT minor] complements my major, journalism, as
where the technology of journalism is going, and what new mediums we
will be using to portray the news. I do think they are hard, and I
haven’t understood everything they said, but I think overall I have a
much better grasp of technology than I did

Another student mentioned that he is taking the IT minor to narrow down
his expertise in writing to an IT-related subfield, for example, to
become a lawyer specialized in cyberspace law.

Larry: I am going to law school, and I am planning on doing something
very related to IT, or technology in general, maybe something like cyber
law….

Another important reason is to differentiate themselves from others with
similar qualifications. Kelly is a humanities student who is planning to
continue her study in library and information science after college. She
thinks that there are so many librarians-to-be who have similar
qualifications. She considers IT competency as something that would make
her unique by showing her well-roundedness.

Kelly: I feel like it’ll at least give me a little bit more a
well-rounded aspect just than just doing humanities. Having any sort of
IT competency is gonna put you so much higher in the rankings as far as
finding positions than anyone else.

Most students’ comments indicated that some practical value of
receiving IT education, rather than an inherent interest in IT, is a
critical factor in their decision to take the IT minor. 

Factors that Influence Students’ Choice of IT minor 

Students’ comments about the IT education program indicate that there
would be numerous challenges in building and administering a successful
undergraduate IT education program. 

First of all, the IT minor is optional to students, unlike a major.
Students mentioned that they have to weigh carefully the value of doing
the IT minor with other valuable opportunities that they could possibly
take, such as internships, study abroad opportunities, part-time jobs,
campus honors’ programs, and participating in student organizations. 

Another important factor in doing the IT minor is how flexible the
course requirements within their major are. While some social science
majors do encourage students to have a minor with an additional
requirement like “20 hours of supporting coursework”, other majors
leave no room for students to seek another interest. Nathan, who is a
senior in computer engineering, cautioned that a student in his major
has to be very careful in choosing to do something outside of his major.

Nathan: In engineering, if you’re going to take courses that aren’t
technical, a lot of times you need to make sure if those are counting
for something. 

For him, if he takes something outside his major without confirming that
the outside course counts towards something for his degree, it would
cause trouble in finishing his degree on time.

Some students expressed their worries that other important people like
hiring managers would not know what the IT minor is. Rachel, a business
student, made an interesting comment, based on her interviewing
experience for an internship. 

Rachel: [In my interviews,] I asked some of the recruiters, what would
they think of the IT minor. I think a lot of recruiters would
misunderstand, they think IT as computer science, so they think oh,
you’re an accounting major, we need you to do accounting, we don’t
need you to fix computers. That’s their idea. I don’t think they
would understand what it is. 

“Fixing a computer” may be a popular stereotype about IT work.
Rachel’s comment signals that raising other stakeholders’ awareness
about an IT education program would be an important factor for students
to have a positive impression about an IT program. If other people who
have significant influence on students’ future do not understand what
an IT program is, it would make students hesitant about choosing an IT
program. 

CONCLUSION

In this study, students from different majors showed diverse interests
in IT education. However, the existing computer science program does not
seem to respond to those interests. Students also pointed out that
higher education in general has a gap in addressing the issues emerging
from increasing implementation of IT. In addition, most students
indicated that they are anticipating some practical advantages by
enrolling in an IT education program. The findings also signal that
marketing of an IT program should be directed not only to students, but
to various stakeholder groups whose perspectives have significant
influence on college students. 

Students’ comments also implied that IT education is facing many
challenges. It seems that many of the challenges for an IT program come
from its interdisciplinary nature. IT programs are usually built as an
interdisciplinary endeavor, as they usually start with the recognition
that there is a niche between technologies and their social contexts. To
fill the niche, the IT programs emphasize gathering multiple
perspectives for viewing computing, from sociology, from communications,
and from computer science, etc. To sustain an interdisciplinary program,
gathering and organizing supports from many disciplines is crucial.
Berghel and Sallach [1] have already observed that many IT programs are
being organized at a university level rather than at a departmental
level. 

The scope of this study is limited to an IT minor program in a specific
university. Therefore, the findings may not hold for students in other
universities or in other IT programs that are offered as a major
program. This case study was conducted with the intention of getting an
in-depth understanding of students’ perspectives. There are not many
previous studies about students’ perceptions about IT education. At
this stage, the benefits of identifying students’ various issues
involved in receiving IT education outweigh the value of getting
generalizable findings across a large number of college students. 

The findings strongly suggest that students expect an IT education
program that has a different focus than that of the other existing
computing programs. “Just me in a closet with a computer” may be a
common portrait of programming/computer science that students have.
Wanting something different from that is a major reason that students
seek IT education. Students from various majors want some computing
education that is more interesting, more practical, and more meaningful
than CS. This study is valuable in that it delivers this anticipation to
the IT educators’ community.  

REFERENCES

Berghel, H., and Sallach, D. L. 2004. A paradigm shift in computing and
IT education. Communications of the ACM, 47(6). 83-88. 

Facer, K., Sutherland, R. J., Furlong, R., and Furlong. J. 2001. What's
the point of using computers? The development of young people's
expertise in the home. New Media and Society, 3(2). 199-219.

Hargittai, E., and Hinnant, A. 2005. Toward a social framework for
information seeking. In Spink, A. & Cole, C. (eds). New directions in
Human Information Behavior. New York: Springer. 

National Telecommunications and Information Administration. 1999.
Falling through the Net. Available at   HYPERLINK
"http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn99/contents.html" 
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn99/contents.html 

Nielsen, J. 1994. Usability Engineering. Boston: AP Professional.

Rogoff, B. 1990. Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in
social context. New York: Oxford University Press.

Smolak, L. 1993. Adult development. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice
Hall.

Spliter, V. K. 2005. Learning to use IT in the workplace: Mechanisms and
masters. Journal of Organizational and End User Computing, 17(2). 1-25.

Twidale, M. B. 2005. Over the shoulder learning: supporting brief
informal learning. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 14(6). 505-547.

Vygotsky, L. S. 1986. Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



 PAGE   

Computers

Web technologies

Programming

Where students’ interests are

