Prim Drift, CopyBots, and Folk Preservation: Three Copyright Parables
about Art in the Digital Age

Kari Kraus

University of Maryland

College of Information Studies

Department of English

College Park, MD 20742-4345

1.240.997.9759

kkraus@umd.edu

ABSTRACT

This paper employs a series of case studies from the domains of

digital arts and creative/experimental new media to elicit tensions and
contradictions in the current state of copyright and intellectual
property law. I pay particular attention to the role of the "pirate" as
preservationist--rather than taint or corrupt, historically we know that
piracy has helped guarantee the survival of important works of
literature and art. Throughout, I insist that the humanist is not a
dabbler or interloper in these matters; humanistic knowledge,
particularly semiotics (the study of sign systems) has the potential to
lend consistency and coherence to case law that is currently shot
through with loopholes, contradictions, and dead ends. To that end, I
also outline the potential of a center devoted to intellectual property
law and humanities advocacy.

Topics

	Information policy, ethics, and law

	Preserving digital information

Keywords

Second Life, virtual worlds, intellectual property, copyright, arts and
humanities, preservation, multi-user virtual environments

INTRODUCTION

In 2006 the American Council of Learned Societies published “Our
Cultural Commonwealth,” a landmark report on cyberinfrastructure for
the humanities and social sciences.  As used by the Commission, the term
“cyberinfrastructure” covers the aggregate social, technological,
institutional, legal, economic, and human capital needed to advance the
humanities and social sciences in a global digital environment (ACLS 6).
 Brett Bobley of the National Endowment for the Humanities provided some
indication of the stature of the ACLS report at a recent talk at the 

Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities when he referred to
it as the “Bible” of the NEH’s new digital humanities initiative.

Copyright and Disclaimer Information

The copyright of this document remains with the authors and/or their
institutions. By submitting their papers to the iSchools Conference 2008
web site, the authors hereby grant a non-exclusive license for the
iSchools to post and disseminate their papers on its web site and any
other electronic media. Contact the authors directly for any use outside
of downloading and referencing this paper. Neither the iSchools nor any
of its associated universities endorse this work. The authors are solely
responsible for their paper’s content. Our thanks to the Association
for Computing Machinery for permission to adapt and use their template
for the iSchools 2008 Conference. 

“Our Cultural Commonwealth” identifies six key challenges that must
be overcome if we are to fulfill the promise of a robust
cyberinfrastructure, of which arguably the most daunting and complex is
copyright (18-25).  In its 51-page document, the Commission invokes
intellectual property no less than 47 times, ultimately concluding that
although it “can offer no simple solutions” (31), the various
stakeholders named in the report nonetheless have an obligation to do
what they can to strengthen and support the public domain and fair use
provisions of the law.  To decline this advocacy role is to jeopardize
the precious few limitations on absolute copyright upon which we as
information professionals rely in our efforts to preserve and transmit
the cultural record.  Perhaps nowhere is that danger more ominously
expressed than in Susan Bielstein’s Permissions, A Survival Guide:
Blunt Talk about Art as Intellectual Property:      

Asking permission [of a rights holder] zealously and unnecessarily also
catches you up in a mentality of acquiescence.  Acquiescence is a
wasting disease rooted in anxiety and ignorance, and it helps propel the
all-consuming permissions culture . . . in the quotidian world of
intellectual property, acquiescence operates far beneath the beacon eye
of statute or treaty, and capitalizing on it is not good for anyone’s
health.  It wastes time, it wastes money, and it produces a compliant
society vulnerable to abuse and wholesale ideological shifts in the law.
(10-11) 

The purpose of this talk, then, is twofold: first, to furnish a case
file of network-driven digital art that dramatizes the conflict between
private and public rights in creative culture (i.e., the provocative
“prim drift,” “copybots,” and “folk preservation” mentioned
in my title, which are part of a larger conversation about emergent art
genres and creative communication technologies, such as 3D virtual
worlds, that, although still in their infancy, will shortly become as
established in their own way as television and video are today); and
second, to propose, as an experimental intervention into the legal
system (and modeled in part after the Electronic Frontier Foundation) a
humanities center staffed by archivists, librarians, visual resource
curators, art historians, humanities researchers, and lawyers dedicated
to testing in a court of law (with the aim of legally validating) claims
that, in the words of Gary Schwartz, have the potential to “maximize
our own collective position as holders of copyright” in public domain
works or, I would add, as users of copyright in private domain works.

The choice of an arts and humanities dataset to seed the discussion
about copyright is inspired in part by a venerable roster of artists who
have challenged prevailing assumptions about the nature of creativity,
originality, and authorship.  These assumptions in turn inform cultural
attitudes toward intellectual property.  The cut-ups of William S.
Burroughs; the ready-mades of Marcel Duchamp; the appropriation art of
Sherrie Levine, Jeff Koons, and Andy Warhol all potentially run afoul of
modern IP law.  For this reason, the arts frequently act as an early
warning system for copyright, alerting us to potential ambiguities in
the case law or to legislative actions that alter, intentionally or not,
the delicate balance between the rights of creators and the rights of
users that the framers of the Constitution sought to protect.  It is not
only artists themselves, but also the collectors, scholars, publishers,
museums, libraries, executors, and rights agents drawn into their orbit
who have the power to upset or restore the golden mean of copyright. 

PRIM DRIFT

In the multi-user virtual environment Second Life, “prims”—short
for “primitives”—are the basic building blocks from which 3D
objects such as cars, houses, books, and furniture are built. 
Individual prims can be linked together into larger systems to form
complex shapes.  Although generally stable, such builds will sometimes
“drift” over time: like tectonic plates sliding past each other,
prims can randomly shift out of position, producing distorted visual
effects (Walsh, “Drifting Apart”).  While content creators can edit
their scripts to repair the damage, potential problems arise once the
items have been sold.  This is because every creative asset in SL is
encoded with a set of permissions that dictate how it may be distributed
and used by other residents.  The permissions system includes four
fields: move, modify, copy, and transfer.  If either the second or
fourth of these is disabled, the owner of the object, as distinct from
its creator, is prevented from exercising freedoms that are normally
either unregulated or protected by law in real life: the right to modify
an object for personal use and the right to resell or give away a
lawfully obtained copy under the First Sale Doctrine (Figures 1, 2, and
3).  Thus, for example, in RL I may annotate my copy of Gone with the
Wind in preparation for class discussion or take it to the bookbinder
for repair if the pages come loose or donate it to my local public
library when I no longer need or want it without infringing on the
author’s copyrights.  By contrast, if I own a book in SL, I may not be
able to do these things: I may not be able to repair the book if it
shows signs of prim drift or give it as a gift to someone else.  The
inability to alter objects for personal use warrants further
consideration: as an analogy, it would be as if I suddenly found myself
in a world where there were no tailors to hem pants or cobblers to mend
shoes or antique experts to restore Grandma’s heirloom hutch.  

The set of problems I’m describing are as applicable to the 2D web as
they are to the 3D web.  Increasingly contract law overrides copyright
law in electronic commerce.  End User Licensing Agreements (EULAs), for
example, complicate the transfer of software applications from one party
to another, suggesting that the erosion of the First Sale and Fair Use
doctrines in Second Life is part of a much larger trend.

Because this example and the other two mentioned in my title function as
limit cases for copyright policy, showing us where the system breaks
down in a digital environment and allowing us to probe its edges, they
help justify what might otherwise be seen as an implausible proposal: to
establish a humanities center that would expand the site of activism to
include not only the customary conference proceedings, working groups,
white papers, articles, and symposia, but also, crucially, the courts. 
Nearly a decade ago, art historian Gary Schwartz urged his colleagues in
a spirited talk at the annual meeting of the College Art Association to
adopt more assertive measures to revive an ailing fair use doctrine.  In
an attempt to persuade his audience members of the need for innovative
approaches, Schwartz informed them that he had been “assured by
counsel that test trials on any of these [copyright] issues, in a
well-chosen court, stand an excellent chance of success.” In 1998,
such a strategy might have seemed improbable; in 2008, I’m convinced
it is not.   With the establishment of a grant initiative in 2003 to
fund work “in the area of intellectual property and the long-term
protection of the public domain,” the MacArthur Foundation has
signaled its readiness to support experimental programs; recent
recipients include the Electronic Frontier Foundation, which was awarded
over half a million dollars in 2007.  The EFF--whose mandate is to
protect the public interest in a networked world--helps defend free
speech, privacy, and consumer rights, in part by subjecting them to
legal proceedings in a court of law.  It thus serves as an important
precedent for the course of action advocated here.

What would distinguish the center I envision from either the EFF or
Stanford’s Center for Internet and Society is the role of the
humanist, who would serve not as an ancillary figure, but one central to
the center’s mission and success.  Although I suspect many are capable
of envisioning humanities scholars as evangelists, public relations
spokespeople, legal assistants, legal researchers, or legislative
advocates in this enterprise, I believe they are qualified to do more:
to serve as expert witnesses or consultants in civil cases involving
intellectual property and the arts.  The literary scholar who
specializes in textual transmission, the philosopher who investigates
theories of language or the nature of universals, and the art historian
who publishes on reproductive printmaking are all de facto semioticians,
experts in sign systems and how they work.  Because intellectual
property concerns itself with originals and copies, a substantial body
of case law hinges on the semiotic distinction between the two.  The
ability to state when two objects are fundamentally the same or
different--to determine, for example, if a copy of Salvador Dali’s
Persistence of Memory is primarily substitutive or transformative--is
therefore a legal desideratum, one which many humanists are qualified to
help address.  

“Given the central and fundamental role of sign systems,” writes
Jeffrey Long in a special issue of Semiotica, “why is the field that
studies them—semiotics—so unknown amongst many who wish to solve
practical problems in business, science, the arts . . . government”
and, we might add, the law (1)?  A preliminary survey of judicial
opinions on court cases that involve accusations of copyright
infringement of visual works of art turns up a network of seemingly
contradictory, ad hoc, or ambiguous rulings that would benefit from the
rigorous application of semiotic principles of individuation, principles
that would allow us to make tighter discriminations among things like
originals, copies, versions, remixes, editions, and other relevant
categories.  The point here is that semiotics could be instrumental in
helping courts adjudicate between the competing copyright claims of
plaintiffs and defendants, as well as in fortifying fair use and the
public domain.  Contrary to the position recently espoused by Stanley
Fish, professor of English and Law at Florida International University,
regarding the lack of any utilitarian value whatsoever of a 21st century
humanities education, the center I’m proposing would provide an
affirmation of the power of humanistic knowledge to shape public policy
in the digital age.   

FOLK PRESERVATION

By “folk preservation,” I mean preservation that is amateur rather
than professional; distributed rather than centralized; and unauthorized
rather than authorized.  It is often of an avocational rather than
vocational nature.  Many of the current preservation initiatives in
Second Life, for example, are folksonomic in character: one of the
longest standing structures in the metaverse, a statue representing the
burning man effigy of the annual art festival held in the deserts of
Nevada (“The Man”), continues to survive in an old parcel of Natoma,
not, at least initially, because of any top-down decree from Linden Lab,
the developer of SL, or the intervention of Real Life (RL) or Second
Life (SL) conservators, but because of the on-going support and efforts
of residents.  

Of the many varieties of folk preservation, the one on which I’d like
to focus is piracy.  Consider three examples: According to industry
insiders, the New York Philharmonic was ironically forced some years
ago, when it began to think seriously about its preservation program, to
purchase surreptitiously made sound recordings of its live performances
from concert-goers who had smuggled their portable recording devices
into the concert hall (Manildi; Winner). The 10-CD commemorative
archival box set of Leonard Bernstein Live, for example, which was
issued by the NY Philharmonic, includes an entire Wagner concert from
1970 taken from an illicit tape made by Roger Frank (Godell).  Such
bootleg music was a mainstay at William Lerner’s record shop Music
Masters in the 60s and 70s, a hangout for musicians and collectors often
in search of rare material (Kozinn).  Although Lerner’s reasons for
hiring freelancers armed with recorders to fill the seats at concert
halls were strictly commercial, both he and Frank nonetheless join the
historical ranks of pirates who deserve recognition for archival and
preservation achievement in the arts.

My second example comes from the world of cinema. In an online
interview, the British screenwriter Peter Briggs relates how he lost and
subsequently found his Alien vs. Predator script: 

I wrote "A vs P" originally . . . on an Amstrad computer, which was
about one step above a Univac Room Filler. In '92 I swapped to an Apple
Mac, which I've used ever since. And I ended up losing the Amstrad disk,
which was some weird, unreadable proprietary brand anyway. It wasn't
until whoever it was transcribed it and pirated it onto the web years
later, that I was able to cut-and-paste it into Final Draft and have an
electronic copy again. So, thank-you, Internet Leaker, wherever you
[are]! (Qtd. by Doctorow)

My third example, the one on which I’d like to spend the most time, is
Agrippa (a book of the dead), an artist’s book co-authored by the
writer William Gibson and the artist Dennis Ashbaugh, and published by
Kevin Begos, Jr. in 1992.  Described in contemporary press releases as a
“multi-unit artwork” (Gibson, “Introduction to Agrippa”),
Agrippa is difficult to classify, both physically and generically.  It
was originally sold in two versions.  The deluxe version came wrapped in
a shroud, its cover artificially aged and its pages
scorched—“time-burned,” like the photo album described in
Gibson’s poem (“Agrippa Files”).  Inside are etchings by Ashbaugh
and double columns of DNA that ostensibly encode the genome of a
fruitfly (Kirschenbaum xi).  Nestled in the center of the book is a 3 ½
inch floppy disk that contains the poem, a meditation on time, memory,
and decay.  Its governing metaphor is that of the mechanism “a
trope,” notes Matthew Kirschenbaum, “that manifests itself as a
photograph album, a Kodak camera, a pistol, and a traffic light, as well
as in less literal configurations. (ix)”  Agrippa, among other things,
is about our misplaced faith in the permanence and objectivity of media.
 Like human memories, media distort, invent, and erase the very objects
they’re designed to preserve: handwriting fades and becomes illegible,
photographs break the fourth wall by constantly reminding us of the
world that lies just outside the picture frame, and inert technological
artifacts put up no resistance when new ones come along to replace or
destroy them.  Paradoxically, the speaker of the poem takes recourse in
his own recollections to supplement the incomplete records of the past,
records that were originally intended to compensate for the limitations
of memory.  By such a process, he tries to recapture, for instance, the
smells of the saw-mill once owned by his father, whose “tumbled boards
and offcuts” are pictured in an old photograph (Gibson Agrippa). 
Drawing on a synaesthetic imagination, he uses the visual stimulus to
prompt an olfactory memory.  This complex interplay between mechanism
and memory structures the poem as a whole and shapes its manifold
meanings.   

Agrippa’s core themes are expressed through form as well as content:
some of Ashbaugh’s etchings are overlaid with images printed in
uncured toner, which are inevitably smudged and distort those beneath
and facing them when the pages are turned (Kirschenbaum xi).  More
stunningly, as has been often described, Gibson’s electronic poem is
encrypted to scroll automatically down the screen once before being
irrevocably lost, its text disappearing after a single reading. Agrippa
is therefore subjected, like all material objects, to the forces of
decay, but here those forces are manufactured rather than natural,
causing the work to disintegrate at an accelerated rate.  Ashbaugh, in
particular, took considerable delight in anticipating how this
volatility would confound librarians, archivists, and conservators: as
Gavin Edwards explains, to register the book's copyright, Ashbaugh
“would need to send two copies to the Library of Congress.  To
classify it, they . . . [would] have to read it, and to read it, they .
. . [would have to] destroy it.”  Significantly, however, it was not
the librarians who found a workaround to the problem, but the pirates. 
On December 9, 1992, a group of New York University students secretly
video-recorded a live public performance of Agrippa at The Americas
Society, an art gallery and experimental performance space in New York
City.  After transcribing the poem, they uploaded it as a plain ASCII
text to MindVox, a notorious NYC Bulletin Board, “the Hells Angels of
Cyberspace,” according to Wikipedia, where it was readily available
for download and quickly proliferated across the web.  “The Hack,”
as the incident has come to be called, is told with the hard-boiled
suspense of a detective story by Matthew Kirschenbaum, who uncovered the
gritty details while working on his new book Mechanisms: New Media and
the Forensic Imagination, recently published by MIT P.   

Although many rare archival and research materials (images, scans,
transcriptions, video footage, and simulations) related to Agrippa are
published on the Agrippa Files website with the permission of Kevin
Begos Jr., the complete text of the poem--arguably the central node of
the work--is not.  The editorial team at the University of California
Santa Barbara provides the following notice by way of explanation:
“Currently, the Agrippa Files does not have permission to reproduce
the full text of the poem. Many wild copies of the text exist on the
Internet. The official copy is on William Gibson’s Web site” (“The
Poem”).  What is worth noting here is that the access mission of the
site is to some degree undercut by copyright laws.  Whereas publicly
accountable archival projects must abide by these laws, they go unheeded
by shadow groups, such as the MindVox users, who transmit culture at
risk of civil litigation.  The irony, of course, is that despite the
poem’s omnipresence on the web, it is absent from the one
authoritative site dedicated to documenting and preserving it.  What the
incident underscores is the way in which short-term private rights
potentially obstruct long-term public rights in cultural heritage. 

COPYBOTS

In an entry dated from January 2008 on Architecture +, a blog covering
commercial products and services for multi-user virtual environments,
JeanRicard Broek cryptically proclaims that a “Library of Congress
copybot is preserving virtual worlds.”  Broek, it turns out, is
reporting on a recently funded grant sponsored by the Library of
Congress to preserve early computer games, interactive fiction, and 3D
virtual worlds.  The multi-institutional project, with which I’m
directly involved, includes the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
(Principal Investigator), Stanford University, the University of
Maryland, and the Rochester Institute of Technology. Because interactive
media are highly complex and at high risk for loss as technologies
rapidly become obsolete, the project seeks to provide basic standards
for metadata and content representation, and conduct a series of
archiving case studies for early video games, electronic literature, and
Second Life.  

The “CopyBot” to which Broek refers is the famed software tool that
wreaked havoc on the fledgling economy of Second Life in 2006. 
Developed by libsecondlife, which describes itself as a project directed
toward “understanding how Second Life works from a technical
perspective, and extending and integrating the metaverse with the rest
of the web,” the program generates clones of in-world objects, such as
avatars, buildings, books, furniture, cars, and the like (Reuters). 
Libsecondlife, which originally created CopyBot with the blessing of
Linden Lab, intended for it to be used as a debugging and back-up
application (Reuters).  Once the source-code was released and
distributed through the SL Exchange marketplace, however, it was edited
and recompiled to duplicate objects without authorization from content
creators, to the great consternation of artists and merchants, many of
whom apparently suffered considerable financial losses as a result
(Wikipedia, “CopyBot”).  Nonetheless, the CopyBot is a technology
that, although used by some customers to violate the law, is capable
(like the home video recorders, photocopying machines, and computers
that came before it) of “substantial non-infringing uses” (EFF,
Betamax Case).

What are we to make of Broek’s analogy, however facetious, between a
legitimate, federally funded preservation program and a software tool
best known for its ability to facilitate criminal activity?  The easy
conflation of preservation with piracy no doubt has something to do with
the fact that the simple act of copying is central to both.  One of the
most reliable ways to preserve an object, after all, is to duplicate it.
 This idea is so basic that it has been codified as a general principle:
“lots of copies keep stuff safe” (LOCKSS).  But an intellectual
property system that grants only minimal exemptions to libraries,
museums, and archives from the prohibition against copying provides
insufficient grounds for putting this principle into action—unless,
that is, there are official or unofficial lines of communication that
exist between them and a grey market economy that plays by different
rules.  

This, indeed, is the lesson of history: our creative heritage
infrastructure has not evolved independently of piratical practices, but
co-dependently with them.  Writing about early European print culture,
for example, in his magisterial The Nature of the Book, Adrian Johns
observes that in the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries
“pirates were . . . not a distinguishable social group.  They existed
at all ranks of the Stationers’ community, [the guild responsible for
enforcing copyrights], and at times were among its most prominent and
upstanding members” (167).  Similarly, Meredith McGill suggests that
unauthorized reprinting in nineteenth-century antebellum America was so
pervasive--so fully embedded in everyday publishing practices--that it
constituted “part of the horizon of the ordinary” (4).  We need,
then, to better understand the systems of exchange that exist between
lawful and unlawful preservation regimes and determine the extent to
which the former is beholden to the latter.  And we need to get a better
purchase on the intellectual property restrictions that apply, directly
or indirectly, to the contact zone between them.  (For example, if a
benefactor were to donate a large collection of materials to a library
that included pirated books or software, the First-Sale Doctrine would
presumably be rendered moot, making parts of the transaction illegal).  
     

Giving credence to the historical importance of the pirate as
preservationist provokes new kinds of questions, some answerable, some
probably not: 

Are there authors whose works have descended to us exclusively in
pirated editions or unauthorized copies or reprints?  If so, who are
they?

If we could tally the total number of books that exist in the world and
divide them into two groups, one containing authorized copies, the other
unauthorized, what would be the ratio of one to the other?  Will we ever
have the means to quantify piracy?  The difficulty of developing
criteria that would allow us to confidently assign a book to one
category or the other would only serve to underscore some of the issues
raised here.

Is pursuing a kind of heroic preservation, whereby we seek to transmit a
cultural artifact wholly intact and unchanged to posterity, a fool’s
errand?  Does cultural piracy demonstrate the truth of the old adage
that the perfect is the enemy of the good?  Is the transformation of
culture from one generation to the next something to be valued rather
than lamented?  Can a fragment or a shard serve as a synecdoche for a
larger whole that once existed? 

My background in textual scholarship and bibliography tells me that we
would be wise to lower the threshold of what constitutes successful
preservation.  The distinction between a legitimate preservation regime
and a piratical one is often illusory, based on the faulty assumption
that the former is the guarantor of stability, while the latter delivers
only volatility.  As an antidote to such notions, I’d like to close
with an account of textual transmission found in the British playwright
Tom Stoppard’s The Invention of Love.  Stoppard’s play tells the
story of the early twentieth-century poet and classicist A. E. Housman,
who, having just died, reminisces about his life while being ferried
across the river Styx by the boatman Charon in the underworld.  In this
passage, an Oxford don narrates the reception history of the Latin poet
Catullus, whose textual fate is shared in its broad strokes by countless
other writers of antiquity.  Here, then, is a tale of preservation,
blemishes and all:

Anyone with a secretary knows that what Catullus really wrote was
already corrupt by the time it was copied twice, which was about the
time of the first Roman invasion of Britain: and the earliest copy that
has come down to us was written about 1,500 years after that.  Think of
all those secretaries!—Corruption breeding corruption from papyrus to
papyrus, and from the last disintegrating scrolls to the first
new-fangled parchment books, with a thousand years of copying-out still
to come, running the gauntlet of changing forms of script and spelling,
and absence of punctuation—not to mention mildew and rats and fire and
flood and Christian disapproval to the brink of extinction as what
Catullus really wrote passed from scribe to scribe, this one drunk, that
one sleepy, another without scruple, and of those sober, wide-awake, and
scrupulous, some ignorant of Latin, and some, even worse, fancying
themselves better Latinists than Catullus—until!—finally and at long
last—mangled and tattered like a dog that has fought its way home,
there falls across the threshold of the Italian Renaissance the sole
surviving witness of thirty generations of carelessness and stupidity:
the Verona Codex of Catullus; which was almost immediately lost again,
but not before being copied with one last opportunity for error.  And
there you have the foundation of the poems of Catullus as they went to
the printer for the first time, in Venice 400 years ago. (24-25)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank Donald Manildi, curator of the International Piano
Archives at the University of Maryland, and Seth Winner, sound
preservations engineer at the New York Public Library, for providing
background on the New York Philharmonic and its preservation program, as
well as information on the surreptitious sound recordings made in the
60s and 70s.  I would also like to thank Alan Liu, project leader of the
Agrippa Files and Professor of English at the University of California,
Santa Barbara; and Matthew Kirschenbaum, Associate Director of MITH and
Associate Professor of English at the University of Maryland, for
sharing their wealth of knowledge about Agrippa.   Finally, I’d like
to acknowledge the learned members of SHARP-L--a listserv sponsored by
the Society for the History of Authorship, Reading, and Print—for
their generous responses to my questions about preservation and book
piracy.  While I didn’t have the opportunity to follow-up on some of
their  valuable leads, readers may wish to consult the public record of
the conversation, which begins here:    HYPERLINK
"https://listserv.indiana.edu/cgi-bin/wa-iub.exe?A2=ind0801&L=SHARP-L&T=
0&F=&S=&P=8206" 
https://listserv.indiana.edu/cgi-bin/wa-iub.exe?A2=ind0801&L=SHARP-L&T=0
&F=&S=&P=8206 .

REFERENCES

[Unless otherwise noted, all URLs were last accessed on 25 January
2008.]

The Agrippa Files. Transcriptions Project, University of California
Santa Barbara. 21 January 2008   HYPERLINK
"http://agrippa.english.ucsb.edu/"  http://agrippa.english.ucsb.edu/ .

Bielstein, Susan M. Permissions, A Survival Guide: Blunt Talk about Art
as Intellectual Property. University Of Chicago Press, 2006.

Bobley, Brett. “A Candid Chat About the NEH’s Digital Humanities
Initiative.”  MITH Digital Dialogue.  University of Maryland.  16
October 2007.

Broek, JeanRicard.  “Library of Congress CopyBot is Preserving Second
Life.”  Architecture + January 2008   HYPERLINK
"http://jeanricardbroek-architect.blogspot.com/2008/01/library-of-conges
s-copybot-is.html" 
http://jeanricardbroek-architect.blogspot.com/2008/01/library-of-congess
-copybot-is.html .

"CopyBot." Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 14 Jan 2008, 15:48 UTC.
Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. 26 Jan 2008   HYPERLINK
"http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CopyBot&oldid=184268503" 
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CopyBot&oldid=184268503  .

Doctorow, Cory.  “Alien v Predator Script Saved by Internet
Pirates.”  6 November 2004 BoingBoing   HYPERLINK
"http://www.boingboing.net/2004/11/06/alien-v-predator-scr.html" 
http://www.boingboing.net/2004/11/06/alien-v-predator-scr.html .

Electronic Frontier Foundation.  29 Oct 2007   HYPERLINK
"http://www.eff.org"  http://www.eff.org .

--. “The Betamax Case.”    HYPERLINK
"http://w2.eff.org/legal/cases/betamax/" 
http://w2.eff.org/legal/cases/betamax/ .

Edwards, Gavin.  “CyberLit: William Gibson’s Latest Story Costs
$450, Comes on Disk, and Self-Destructs after One Reading.”  Details
June 1992.  Transcription available at   HYPERLINK
"http://www.matarese.com/matarese-files/3580/cyberlit-william-gibson-lat
est-story-costs-comes-disk-self-destructs/index.html" 
http://www.matarese.com/matarese-files/3580/cyberlit-william-gibson-late
st-story-costs-comes-disk-self-destructs/index.html .

Fish, Stanley.  “Will the Humanities Save Us?”  New York Times 6
January 2008   HYPERLINK
"http://fish.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/01/06/will-the-humanities-save-us/" 
http://fish.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/01/06/will-the-humanities-save-us/ .

Gibson, William.  Agrippa: A Book of The Dead   HYPERLINK
"http://www.williamgibsonbooks.com/source/agrippa.asp" 
http://www.williamgibsonbooks.com/source/agrippa.asp .

Godell, Tom.  “Bernstein Live.”  American Record Guide 1 March 2001 
 HYPERLINK
"http://www.accessmylibrary.com/coms2/summary_0286-10950492_ITM" 
http://www.accessmylibrary.com/coms2/summary_0286-10950492_ITM .

Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic
Imagination. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2008.

Kozinn, Alan.  “A Music Lovers’ Mecca is Closing.”  New York Times
7 November 1990   HYPERLINK
"http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C0CE7DF1E3CF934A35752C1
A966958260" 
http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C0CE7DF1E3CF934A35752C1A
966958260 . 

Johns, Adrian.  The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the
Making.  Chicago: Chicago UP, 1998.

Libsecondlife.    HYPERLINK
"http://www.libsecondlife.org/wiki/Main_Page" 
http://www.libsecondlife.org/wiki/Main_Page .

LOCKSS [Lots of Copies Keep Stuff Safe].   HYPERLINK
"http://www.lockss.org/lockss/Home"  http://www.lockss.org/lockss/Home .

Long, Jeffrey.  “Editor’s Note.”  Semiotica 125 (1999): 1-13. 
Special issue on notation systems.

MacArthur Foundation. "Intellectual Property and the Public Domain." 29
Oct 2007   HYPERLINK
"http://www.macfound.org/site/c.lkLXJ8MQKrH/b.943331/k.DA6/General_Grant
making__Intellectual_Property.htm" 
http://www.macfound.org/site/c.lkLXJ8MQKrH/b.943331/k.DA6/General_Grantm
aking__Intellectual_Property.htm . 

---.  "Recent Grants." 29 Oct 2007   HYPERLINK
"http://www.macfound.org/site/c.lkLXJ8MQKrH/b.1002695/k.9993/General_Gra
ntmaking__Intellectual_Property__Recent_Grants.htm" 
http://www.macfound.org/site/c.lkLXJ8MQKrH/b.1002695/k.9993/General_Gran
tmaking__Intellectual_Property__Recent_Grants.htm .

Reuters, Adam.  “Outcry as ‘CopyBot’ Threatens Copyright
Protection.”  Reuters Second Life News Center 14 November 2006  
HYPERLINK
"http://secondlife.reuters.com/stories/2006/11/14/outcry-as-copybot-thre
atens-copyright-protection/" 
http://secondlife.reuters.com/stories/2006/11/14/outcry-as-copybot-threa
tens-copyright-protection/ .

“The Man.”  Second Life Wiki   HYPERLINK
"http://secondlife.wikia.com/wiki/The_Man" 
http://secondlife.wikia.com/wiki/The_Man .

McGill, Meredith.  American Literature and the Culture of Reprinting,
1834-1853.  Philadelphia: U of Philadelphia P, 2003.

Our Cultural Commonwealth: The final report of the American Council of
Learned Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities &
Social Sciences. Washington DC: ACLS, 2006    HYPERLINK
"http://www.acls.org/cyberinfrastructure/acls.ci.report.pdf" 
www.acls.org/cyberinfrastructure/acls.ci.report.pdf .

Schwartz, Gary. "No Fair: Long-Term Prospects for Regaining Unencumbered
Use." Toronto Town Meeting Program. College Art Association. February
1998.  29 Oct 2007   HYPERLINK
"http://www.pipeline.com/~rabaron/ttm/SCHWARTZ.htm" 
http://www.pipeline.com/~rabaron/ttm/SCHWARTZ.htm . 

Stoppard, Tom.  The Invention of Love.  New York: Grove P, 1998.

Walsh, Tony.  “Another Look at ‘Second Life’ Copyright Issues.” 
Clickable Culture. 11 September 2006.   HYPERLINK
"http://www.secretlair.com/index.php?/clickableculture/entry/another_loo
k_at_second_life_copyright_issues/" 
http://www.secretlair.com/index.php?/clickableculture/entry/another_look
_at_second_life_copyright_issues/ .

--. "Drifting Apart." Clickable Culture. 10 June 2004. 29 Oct 2007  
HYPERLINK
"http://www.secretlair.com/index.php?/clickableculture/entry/my_second_l
ife_part_9/" 
http://www.secretlair.com/index.php?/clickableculture/entry/my_second_li
fe_part_9/ . 

Figure 1: Notice (left page) published by the Bobbs-Merrill Co. in The
Castaway by Hallie Erminie Rives in 1904.  The attempt to use the right
of distribution to control resale of the book eventually led to the
landmark Supreme Court decision Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S.
339 (1908).  The case codified The First Sale Doctrine.   The image is a
screenshot taken from the electronic version of the novel available on
the Internet Archive at   HYPERLINK
"http://www.archive.org/details/castaway00riveiala" 
http://www.archive.org/details/castaway00riveiala . 

Figure 2: A physical copy of the novel Anima by Dalian Hansen (digitalKu
2007).  The freedoms to modify (write in the margins, dogear the pages,
etc.) and resell lawfully obtained copies of the book are protected by
Fair Use, First Sale, and de minimis doctrines.  

Figure 3: Virtual Copy of Anima by Dalian Hansen.  This version of the
novel can only be read in the virtual world of Second Life.  In this
case the author has disabled transfer and modification rights.  The
permissions system of SL partially nullifies the Fair Use, First Sale,
and de minimis doctrines that operate in real life.

 On the fragment as a unit of preservation, see David Lowenthal,
“Material Preservation and its Alternatives,” Perspecta 25 (1989):
66-77.

 PAGE   

