Privacy and Participation in Ubiquitous Information Systems:
Information Ethics when Mobile Phones are Sensors
Ubiquitious information systems hold increasing promise for widespread participation in data
collection and dissemination. Common and abundant devices such as mobile phones can
sense and record data such as location, sound, and images. These systems can facilitate
community participation in basic and applied research, improvement of quality of life, social
change, self-reflection, and creative expression. But the design and use of these tools also pose
new challenges for privacy, data security, and ethics.
This paper explores responsible approaches to the design of systems for ubiquitous digital
capture. The authors include an Information Studies researcher working alongside computer
scientists and engineers from the Center for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS). This
ongoing partnership pairs ethical frameworks developed within Information Studies and
Science and Technology Studies with system design expertise and concrete, real-world
challenges. For example, CENS is developing a platform to share activity inferences generated
with geospatial data from mobile phones to assess personal environmental impact. CENS is
also exploring systems for capturing and sharing data about neighborhood walkability and
other community assets. The ongoing research detailed in this paper investigates how such
ubiquitous sensing projects can conscientiously collect personal data for social science and
participatory research applications.

Background

Previous research has proposed a variety of technical
approaches to privacy protection in a world of increasing
information capture. These include encryption, privacyenhancing technologies (PETs), and statistical anonymization of
data (Burkert, 1998). While these approaches to privacy
protection are important in human-embedded sensing systems,
we argue that privacy requirements for networks of sensitive
personal data extend beyond such measures.

Figure 1: A CENS project tracks
and shares users’ movements.

Individuals experience privacy as a fluid concept. Privacy
concerns extend beyond anonymity or data protection; privacy
can be a process of regulating boundaries or a method of
portraying particular personal identities (Palen & Dourish,
2003). Privacy expectations are shaped by social conventions
(Waldo, Lin, & Millett, 2007) and by places and spaces of data
capture (Cohen, 2008). Individuals may feel threats to privacy
during data collection, during data sharing, or if data remains
accessible indefinitely.

Designing for Privacy and Participation

This paper details design considerations and practices that promote a balance between
participation and privacy. An interdisciplinary team hosted by CENS has iterativly developed
design principles that respect a multi-faceted defininition of personal and social privacy. The
paper will detail design guidelines such as targeted capture, data retention policy, and methods

for identification of privacy pressure points in a
ubiquitous information system. It will emphasise
techniques for responsive system design based upon
user-specified privacy needs. Finally, we will
emphasize participation over restriction as a response
to privacy ethics. We argue that by finding a balance
between privacy and participation, embedded network
sensing systems can reach their research,
empowerment and documentary potential while
respecting participant privacy concerns.

Figure 2: CENS interns participate in cooperative data
gathering and analysis.

References
Burkert, H. (1998). Privacy-enhancing technologies: Typology, critique, vision. In P. E. Agre
& M. Rotenberg (Eds.), Technology and privacy: The new landscape (pp. 125-142).
Cambridge, MA and London: The MIT Press.
Cohen, J. E. (2008). Privacy, Visibility, Transparency, and Exposure. University of Chicago Law
Review, 75(1).
Friedman, B., Kahn Jr., P. H., Hagman, J., & Severson, R. L. (2006). The watcher and the
watched: Social judgements about privacy in a public place. Human-Computer Interaction,
21, 235-272.
Palen, L., & Dourish, P. (2003, April 5-10). Unpacking "privacy" for a networked world. In
Proceedings of CHI 2003, Ft. Lauderdale, FL: ACM, 129-136.
Waldo, J., Lin, H. S., & Millett, L. I. (2007). Engaging privacy and information technology in a digital
age. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

