Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 1

Taylor’s Value-Added Model: Still Relevant After All These Years
Mike Eisenberg, University of Washington
Lee Dirks, Microsoft Corporation
iConference
February 27-March 1, 2008
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.

Introduction
This paper is an effort to reacquaint the information field with the work of one of its pioneers:
Robert S. Taylor and his Value-Added Model. Taylor’s Value-Added model (1986) was a broad
and ambitious effort to provide a unified framework for focusing on user needs and preferences
in evaluating and designing information systems. Although developed in the early 1980s—
before the wide-spread adoption of the microcomputer, and well-before the Internet and web–
based technologies that have so changed our lives—the model holds up remarkably well in terms
of explaining why various systems and systems attributes are useful and desirable or not. *
The Value-Added Model seeks to explain what users want, why they want them, and how
systems are able to meet (or not meet) those needs? “What do users want from information
systems that would enable them to perform better, however “better performance” is defined in
their context?” (Taylor p. 55) This paper updates Taylor’s work in light of dramatic
developments over the past 20 years and demonstrates how the model remains highly applicable
and valuable in both research and practical contexts across the interests of ischools.
Robert “Bob” Taylor is well-known for his contributions to library and information science. His
1968 paper, “Question Negotiation and the Reference Process,” (Taylor 1968) was one of the
first works to emphasize a user and information perspective. It remains one of the most cited
works in the history of library and information science. † Taylor was also a visionary and pioneer
in the movement that led to the formation of information schools. In the mid-1970s, he assumed
the deanship at Syracuse, changed the name to the School of Information Studies and launched
their doctoral program and later the Master’s in Information Resources Management. Taylor
finished his career with his work on the Value-Added Model.
The goals of this paper are:
(1) To reintroduce the field to Taylor’s model.
(2) To suggest revisions to the model based on our experience and our interactions with
information professionals and graduate students.
(3) To demonstrate the widespread applicability of the modified model in current contexts to
better understanding users, information, systems, as well as the scope of the information
field.
(4) To offer recommendations for further work to develop and use the modified model.

*

We state this from personal experience in using Taylor’s model in formal presentations and graduate courses.
For example, a quick “Cited Reference Search in the ISI Web of Knowledge notes 255 citations for the 1968
College & Research Libraries paper.

†

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 2

The Taylor model (both the original and our proposed modified model) helps explain the
motivation of users, why certain systems and systems features perform so well in meeting user’s
needs or not (e.g., electronic spreadsheets, email, Google, Amazon, GUI, the Web, social
networks). Indeed, we posit that Taylor’s model can (and should) help to guide systems design,
user studies, marketing, and entrepreneurship in information management. This last area may be
its most compelling use. Entrepreneurs seeking to determine new products and services can
utilize this updated Taylor model as a check-list for improving, enhancing or developing new
and more compelling information products and services. In this paper, we offer the modified
Taylor value-added model as a means to better understand and explain successful
entrepreneurship and innovation.
The paper closes with an outline for further development, application, and research of the Taylor
model. The ischool community continues to seek ways of explaining to wider audiences what it
is that we do and why it is important. We believe that in re-acquainting the field with an
evolved/updated view of Taylor’s seminal work, a functional model will greatly facilitate this
important effort.
Taylor’s Value-Added Model
As noted above, the purpose of the Value-Added Model was to provide a framework for
considering information and systems from a user perspective. Underlying the model are the
three foundation elements of the information field—people, information, and technology:
1. People: The main focus is on the user. Systems exist to meet the information needs of
users. Additionally, people can be viewed as part of the system.
2. Information: There is a hierarchy of information - the “information spectrum.” As value
is added, we move up the spectrum from data to information to knowledge to action.
3. Systems: The purpose of an information system is to add value to better meet user needs.
Various systems’ processes add value in order to meet user needs.
Taylor emphasized that information systems are all about meeting the needs of users. Systems
and the underlying system processes, algorithms, and features exist to add value in order to meet
those needs. The Value-Added Model provides an organized framework for considering system
processes that add value in order to meet user needs. Taylor’s original Value Added framework
is presented in Figure 1 (Figure 4.2 from his book (Taylor, 1986 p. 50).

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 3

Figure 1: Taylor's Value‐Added Model. From Taylor 1986, Table 4.2. p. 50.
USER CRITERIA
OF CHOICE

INTERFACE (Values Added)

SYSTEM (Value-added Processes)

Ease of Use

Browsing
Formatting
Interfacing I (Mediation)
Interfacing II (Orientation)
Ordering
Physical Accessibility

Alphabetizing
Highlighting important terms

Noise Reduction

Access I (Item identification)
Access II (Subject description)
Access III (Subject summary)
Linkage
Precision
Selectivity

Indexing
Vocabulary control
Filtering

Quality

Accuracy
Comprehensiveness
Currency
Reliability
Validity

Quality control
Editing
Updating
Analyzing and comparing data

Adaptability

Closeness to problem
Flexibility
Simplicity
Stimulatory

Provision of data manipulation capabilities
Ranking output for relevance

Time-Saving

Response Speed

Reduction of processing time

Cost-Saving

Cost-saving

Lower connect-time price

The first column on the left, “USER CRITERIA OF CHOICE” includes the broad categories of
criteria that are important to users in choosing a system or in evaluating how well a system
performs. These criteria are not absolute or fixed. Consider the different situations of a senior
NASA scientist and a 4th grade student. If both were using information systems to seek
information about climate change in the Arctic, the scientist might rate quality (with the
associated values of currency, accuracy, and reliability) as the top priority. For the 4th grader,
ease of use (with the value accessibility) or cost-saving might be as if not more important. The
relative priority of one or another criteria will depend on the person, situation, needs, setting,
and other user-centered aspects.
The second column, labeled “INTERFACE (Values Added)” includes the more specific values
that are added in order to best meet the USER CRITERIA OF CHOICE. For example, accuracy,
comprehensiveness, currency, reliability, and validity all can contribute to meeting the user

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 4

criterion “Quality.” The user criteria “Noise Reduction” relates to values of access, linkages,
precision, and selectivity.
Taylor’s last column is labeled, SYSTEM (Value-added processes). These are the processes,
features, and elements of the system that add to the related values identified in column 2 (which
in turn meet the user criteria of column 1). For example, the processes of quality control,
editing, updating, and analyzing may contribute to the values added of accuracy,
comprehensiveness, currency, reliability, and validity which then combine to address the user
criterion of Quality.
As pointed out in the introduction, this model was developed well before many of the
technological changes that have fundamentally altered human society, e.g., the personal
computer, cell phones, the Internet, the World Wide Web. However, the model is robust and
highly useful in explaining why these and other technological innovations are adopted and
valued by individuals and organizations.
Taylor explains the intricacies of the model and defines various terms in Chapter 4 of his 1986
book. He also provides a table of definitions of his identified Values-Added. Rather than
replicate Taylor’s elaboration here, this paper first presents suggested modifications that clarify
and expand the original Value-Added Model. This is followed by an abbreviated discussion of
user criteria, values added, and system processes within the context of a suggested modified
Value-Added Model.
Eisenberg-Dirks Modifications to Taylor’s Value-Added Model
The core of Taylor’s model is represented in Figure 4.2 from his 1986 book, reproduced above as
Figure 1. Our suggested modifications relate to this figure and are presented below in Figure 2.
While we have shared these modifications previously with various audiences through
presentations, this is the first recorded paper outlining our thoughts. Therefore, we see these as
formative or proposed modifications, and we expect that feedback from readers as well as from
our field-based investigations will help us to fashion a more complete and conclusive Modified
Value Added Model. In addition, we recognize the desirability of identifying, analyzing, and
comparing frameworks and models of fundamental concepts of information, systems, services,
and behaviors (e.g., relevance, credibility, use). We expect that this too will lead to adjustments
in specific elements included in the modified model. For example, we anticipate that advances
in the application of semantic technology could have major implications in the User Criteria of
“Ease of Use” and “Noise Reduction.”

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 5

Eisenberg/Dirks Modified Taylor's Value‐Added Model, Feb 2008
Based on Table 4.2. Taylor 1986, p. 50.
USER CRITERIA

VALUES ADDED

SYSTEM PROCESSES

Ease of Use

Browsing
Simplicity
Mediation
Orientation
Ordering
Accessibility

Alphabetizing
Highlighting
Formatting
Simplifying

Noise Reduction

Item identification
Classification
Summarization
Order
Referral
Precision
Selectivity
Novelty

Indexing
Controlled vocabulary
Filtering
Selection
Hyperlinking
Semantic connecting
Search

Quality

Accuracy
Comprehensiveness
Currency
Reliability
Validity
Authority

Quality control
Editing
Updating
Analyzing
Selecting

Adaptability

Contextuality
Flexibility
Simplicity
Privacy

Data manipulation capabilities
Sorting
Customizing
User profiling
Informed consent
Choice

Performance

Time saving
Cost saving
Security
Safety

Bandwidth
Parallel processing
Server size
Processor speed
Resource allocation/sharing
Multi‐tasking
Common protocols, business
practices
Encryption
Password protection

Pleasing

Aesthetics
Entertaining
Rewarding
Engaging
Stimulating

Design
Interactive
Gaming
Reinforcing

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 6

Our first recommended changes to Taylor’s original model relate to the overarching terminology
used. Taylor presents a three part view as the basis for the model: user, interface, and system.
The “User” part focus on the problems which establish the criteria of choice. The “Interface” is
a negotiating space between the user and the system and, according to Taylor, displays the values
added by the system to assist the user in making choices. The “System” includes the specific
processes that add specific values. (Taylor 1986, p. 49)
These labels can be difficult in explaining and applying the model, partially because of using the
word “values” and term “value-added” in slightly different ways in the same table. We therefore
offer a simplified labeling of the three part view:
•
•
•

User Criteria
Values-Added
System Process

Instead of “user criteria of choice” it’s more direct to simply state, “User Criteria.” For column
two, “Values-Added” encompasses much more than just the interface. The term “Values-Added
is still consistent with Taylor’s description of these being the “values added by the system which
aid customers in matching their needs.” (Taylor 1986, p. 51). Lastly, in his text, Taylor refers to
value-added processes and system processes interchangeably. “System processes” is preferred
here as it avoids confusion with the “Values-Added” from column two. The use these terms
helps to emphasize the relationships across the columns of the model. That is, various system
processes.
Our second group of modifications involves the more specific elements of the model in each of
the three columns. Again, while the original Value-Added Model is still useful for describing
and analyzing current user and system interactions, developments over the past twenty years
point to additional criteria and related values added. Taylor himself notes that his criteria are
broken into six categories for convenience sake and are not graven in stone. (Taylor 1986 p. 51)
We agree with his statement that they are a useful way of organizing the values that are added,
but we offer a reformulation of the last two criteria (Time-saving and Cost-saving) under the
broader heading of Performance. We also propose an additional criterion, Pleasing, which
relates to the values of aesthetics, entertaining, reward, and engaging.
Taylor sought to derive his criteria and values added from the literature, but found it equally
important to learn from professional experience. He found few studies concerned directly with
values and user benefits, so he drew on various formal and informal sources. At this point in
time, our suggested modifications in criteria, values added, and system processes derive from
personal reflection and field-based experience. We recognize the importance of comparing and
testing the modified model in relation to the literature as well as through systematic
investigations.
Turning to column two, now labeled simply “Values Added,” Taylor’s original list is both
consolidated and expanded. Here are some examples:
• For user criterion, “Ease of Use,” Taylor offers mediation and orientation as two different
ways of “interfacing.” The modified model focuses on each more separately with the
value of “Mediation” referring to assistance/help and “Orientation” for user familiarity or
navigation with the system. The modified model also recognizes that the value of
“Accessibility” is not just limited to physical, but virtual as well.

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 7

•

For “Noise Reduction,” the revised model seeks to break out three values added nested
within the term “access.” The modified model emphasizes item identification,
classification, and summarization as separate values added while also offering “Referral”
and “Novelty” as other values added to include.

• “Cost saving” and “time saving” were criteria only minimally developed in Taylor’s
original conceptualization. Cost saving was also listed as both a criterion and a value. In
the modified model, both of these are now considered as Values related to the broader
criterion of Performance. We expect further development of this important criterion in
terms of associated values and system processes.
•

“Security,” “Privacy,” and “Safety” are three identified values added that are
increasingly important. Security and Safety were determined to best relate to the newly
combined user criterion of “Performance” while Privacy seemed increasingly associated
with user-driven desires and therefore best associated to “Adaptability.”

• As noted above, “Pleasing” is a totally new user criterion, with associated values added
of “Aesthetics,” “Entertaining,” “Rewarding,” and “Engaging.”
In certain instances, the values identified in “Values Added” can be applied to different “User
Criteria.” For example, the value “Simplicity” relates to both Ease of Use and Adaptability. In
addition, the terms “relevance,” and “usefulness,” are broad, multidimensional concepts of
information and relate to many of the User Criteria. Relevance and usefulness may be viewed as
infused across the entire Modified Value-Added Model. In the 1986 book, Taylor included a
table of “Definitions of Values Added (see page 69) for all of the values included in the middle
column. We hope to be able to do the same in a subsequent paper.
The third column, “System Processes,” provides examples of the capabilities, approaches, and
features of systems that might be used to add the values (noted in column 2) to meet the criteria
of users (column 1). Systems processes are numerous and continually being developed.
Taylor’s original model only includes a small number of system processes. We attempted to
identify more, however even these are only representative of abundant options.
For example, although likely inferred in Taylor’s original work, the concept of navigating
connections via electronic links (labeled as the system process “Hyperlinking” in the Modified
Model is now obvious and a critical concept for nearly all information systems. Hyperlinking
was conceived by computer scientist Ted Nelson in the 1960s, but it didn’t gain widespread use
until the development of the World Wide Web by Tim Berners-Lee decades later. Still, it is not
an exaggeration to say that this relatively recently-implemented system process—hyperlinking—
is one of the most significant of all system processes because it is the foundation of the World
Wide Web, our most pervasive and now essential information system.
The Modified Value-Added Model helps to explain why this is so. Hyperlinking is a System
Process that relates to the values added of “Item Identification,” “Referral,” “Precision,” and
“Selectivity.” These values, in turn, help to meet the User Criteria of Noise Reduction. This may
seem strange at first because the World Wide Web is often criticized as noisy and contributing to
information overload. However, that’s not due to hyperlinking. In fact, hyperlinking helps users

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 8

to sift through the noise by identifying items of interest, by referral to precise websites or
sections of websites, or by allowing creation of selected links by website or content creators.
The usefulness of other information systems are similarly explained by the model by making the
connection to related Values Added in order to meet identified User Criteria. Consider cell
phones as an information system. For some people when choosing a phone, it’s the “Pleasing”
criteria that are most important. For these users it’s important to emphasize the values added of
aesthetics, entertaining or stimulating. These values are added by the systems processes of
design and interactivity. For other users, it’s “Ease of Use” that’s crucial, and they are looking
for a cell phone that is simple, accessible, and easy to navigate through functions (i.e.,
orientation). System processes of highlighting, formatting, and simplifying help to address these
values and criteria.
For a final example, we return to the situation and needs of the senior NASA scientist and a 4th
grade student noted earlier in this paper. Both were seeking information about climate change in
the Arctic. For the scientist, it is likely to be all about “Quality” of information and the values
that meet the quality criterion are accuracy, currency, comprehensiveness, authority, and
reliability. System processed that address these values include quality control in research
studies, editing and updating of papers and reports, analyzing data sets, and selecting valid and
reliable information from authoritative sources. But, the 4th grade student has different needs that
might relate to “Ease of Use,” and also “Pleasing.” System processes of formatting,
highlighting, and simplifying may add values of simplicity, accessibility, and simplicity for ease
of use. For pleasing, there are processes that provide interactivity and reinforcement.
Finally, although we anticipate the Modified Value-Added Model to evolve in time, we feel that
there are varying degrees to which each column may or may not change. For example, the “User
Criteria” column seems sufficient and complete and unlikely to change substantively. We made
only minor modifications to the original concepts established by Taylor—combining Cost
Effective and Time Saving into Performance and adding the new criterion, “Pleasing.” The
“Value-Added” column is somewhat definitive, but certainly not comprehensive. We expect this
column will require some adjustment and expansion. The most frequent changes will take place
in the “System Processes” column. As with Taylor, this column is intended to be representative
and to change as new system processes and capabilities emerge.
Applying the Modified Value-Added Model
The sections above presented Taylor’s original model and explained our proposed modifications.
We also attempted to demonstrate how the model can be used to explain how different
information systems can add value in order to meet user needs. In our view, the sustained
relevance of Taylor’s Value-Added work is impressive. His concepts and framework are as
applicable and useful as they were twenty years ago. This section offers thoughts as to how the
Modified Value-Added Model is applicable and valuable in practical and educational contexts.
Practical Applications
The role of information professionals has evolved dramatically over the past 20 plus years. In
the ever-quickening transition from the information field’s past (e.g., punch and catalog cards) to
the future (e.g., XML and metadata), the information manager is now thrust into the forefront of
a multi-billion dollar information technology industry. Librarians and other traditional
information professionals are now competing with major corporations and an entire industry of

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 9

information service and system providers facilitating access to information. This explosion of
the information role has evolved and will continue to change, and in this process information
professionals can continue status-quo, or can take charge and proactively adapt to address the
growing information needs of end-users. In this new environment – this global, connected
information marketplace with a new level of attention and scrutiny, it is critical for the
information profession to take a new approach.
The development of information systems and the provision of information services in industry
are fast-paced and ever-changing. It is an extremely aggressive marketplace, where competitive
differentiation and viable substitutes are apparent daily. In this setting, the availability of a
simple framework that can be used to brainstorm and assess potential ideas is an extremely
valuable resource. Using the Modified Value-Added Model to evaluate and re-evaluate
information systems allows the information professional a way to test and improve services and
resources in terms of meeting users’ needs. The consistent, focused application of this model
will result in improved offerings, more successful systems and tools resulting in higher
productivity. These types of benefits can have impact on all sectors, not just private industry.
Shifting from the private sector, it is crucial that information professionals in the public sector
utilize this framework as a tool as well. Whatever setting one is in, the new concept of
“infopreneurship” is taking on greater significance.
For example, assume an aerospace engineer is working on a new project. For her, the most
important User Criteria is Quality. An information professional seeking to assist this user could
consider the values options noted in the middle column (e.g., Accuracy; Comprehensiveness;
Currency; Reliability; etc.) and begin to think about how to add these values given the
information set or the systems available. If the available systems are not able to meet the desired
values, other systems or services can be brought into play. In this way, each of the first two
columns of the Modified Value-Added Model serve as useful pivots that provide information
professionals or managers a framework for considering possible products, services, or systems to
use.
From an industry perspective, the Modified Value-Added Model can be applied in at least three
ways:
1. Developing New Systems & Tools: If charged with developing a whole new information
product or information service from scratch, the Modified Value-Added Model can provide a
thorough, defined way of vetting potential ideas on top of whatever information source you
are working with.
•

Scenario: Two business partners are considering the creation of a brand new online
travel guide. They can consider the User Criteria of “Quality” and then analyze at the
different Value Added options. It is important to keep in mind that each Value Added
can be considered to have a broad range of choices:
Value Added:
QUALITY
Accuracy

Comprehensiveness

High‐End

Low‐End

of the Quality range

of the Quality range

Editors vetting or fact‐checking
data prior to publishing;
established human quality‐
control process.
Content is sourced from

Automatically re‐directing
information feed from
another source without
review.
Content only acquired from a

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 10

Currency

Reliability

multiple definitive sources, on a
global basis.
Website content is updated real‐
time, as changes occur, updates
are automatic.
Links on the site are
automatically checked nightly,
and are deleted if not
resolvable.

single source (from the US).
Web‐site content is updated
manually, twice a week
System doesn’t permit
automatic link checking, so
this is a manual process.

Etc.
Note: In the above example, automatic vs. manual is an important distinction between the two (fictitious)
product offerings: if some cases, automatic is high‐quality because it is instantaneous, whereas in other
cases it can be low‐quality since it has no human/editorial review. In this way, you can see the due‐diligence
that needs to go into the value‐added assessment process.

2. Refining / Improving Existing Tools: Likewise, if the goal is to assess and improve and
existing offering, this Model can help to develop scenarios to generate and test such
enhancements. Following the scenario above, once the small firm’s online travel website
was doing well and the partners need to innovate to attract new customers or lure customer
away from a competitor, they can look at possible ways to enhance your existing services.
•

Scenario: Focusing on the “Adaptability,” here are some possible ideas on how to
brainstorm new ideas for the existing version of the travel website:
Value‐Added:
“ADAPTABILITY”
Contextuality
Flexibility
Simplicity
Privacy

Potential Service Enhancement
Website knows if users are accessing the site from a non‐US
domain, and is able to high‐light local/regional travel tips
depending on your location.
Website knows if users are accessing via a PC or a mobile device,
and automatically adjusts content to the appropriate screen‐size.
If users repeat the same trip on a regular basis, website allows
you to replicate the itinerary automatically to facilitate future
travel.
Users are able to login to a private section where they can save
trip itineraries or bookmark favorite travel recommendations, etc.

Etc.

Studying Competitive Offerings: Even if the immediate goal isn’t to produce an offering, but
instead to better understand and assess what directions other products and services might be
taking, one could utilize this same approach with the intent of exhaustively listing out future
developments by other players in the space. The key is to use the Modified Value-Added Model
to systematically identify user needs and preferences, the values that will meet those preferences,
and the system process that will add the desired values. The model facilitates prioritization by
providing a framework linking user needs, values, and system processes as well as specific items
within each.

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 11

For businesses and organizations, the Modified Value-Added Model can systematically assist in
assessing and understanding:
• The landscape of environment/market-space.
• Varying user/customer needs and potential product/service requirements.
• Other competitors and/or substitutes that are present.
• Existing offering(s), to help define new functionality and why it should be successful.
Educational Applications
Information school graduates need to be prepared to enter a marketplace of ever-increasing
complexity. Either as employees in a private sector business or a public sector organization
(including libraries), all areas are now competing against new forces in our traditional realm–
namely corporate entities such as Google or Microsoft –who are facilitating access to an evergrowing volume of information. It is critical that we prepare students to learn to vie for the time
and attention of information-seekers, to evolve our approach. How that approach is manifest
itself has changed dramatically in the past 10-15 years and will need to continue to evolve to
keep pace with the developments in the marketplace as well as the needs of end users seeking
information for their daily tasks.
Students benefit from a more systematic approach that includes an enhanced service-orientation
and an overall greater entrepreneurial tact. Taylor’s Modified Value-Added Model is a prime
example of the sorts of tools and resources that need to be developed, tested, utilized and
evangelized across our profession. Only in this way can we hope to ensure our students are wellpositioned for success in the job market.
Over the past three years at the University of Washington, both authors have successfully used
the Modified Taylor Model in both undergraduate and graduate-level classes including
Foundations of Informatics, Human Aspects of Information Systems, and the Life Cycle of
Information. We find that the model helps students to move from theoretical understandings of
the “user perspective” to a something more tangible. Students are able to apply the model to a
range of user, use, and systems situations including:
• Persons selecting a cell phone or mobile device.
• The merits and limitations of car dashboard layouts.
• Comparison of search engines.
• Students in distance learning courses.
• Sports information systems.
A typical class exercise, lab, or assignment related to the Value-Added Model requires students
to be able to complete the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Identify an information situation involving users, needs, and information systems.
Describe the situation and use from a systems (input-process-output) perspective.
Describe the situation from a user perspective.
Analyze the situation in terms of:
• User Criteria
• Values Added
• System Processes.

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 12

In every instance, using the Modified Value-Added model to analyze of users, situations, needs
and systems result in rich discussion and brainstorming with students. Applying the model also
seems to engage them to think in a more systematic and entrepreneurial manner.
Future Work
As noted at the outset, this paper seeks to reintroduce Taylor’s Value-Added model because of
its usefulness as a framework for focusing on user needs and preferences in evaluating and
designing information systems. Through analysis, reflection, and explanation, we attempted to
demonstrate how a Modified Value-Added Model remains highly applicable and valuable in
practical and educational contexts.
In terms of research, there is considerable work to be done in terms of (1) further developing and
refining the Modified Value-Added Model; (2) applying and testing the model across situations;
and (3) using the model in research studies to better understand users, needs, and systems. In
addition, we are particularly interested in (4) studying innovation and entrepreneurship from a
value-added perspective. Lastly, we hope to (5) more systematically determining the usefulness
and impact of the model in information school educational programs
Further development and refinement of the Modified Value-Added Model involves delving
deeper in to the literature to make connections between the Value-Added Model and other
conceptualizations of key concepts and understandings in information science (e.g., Saracevic
(2007) and Schamber (1994) on relevance; Metzger (2007) on credibility). There is also
literature to consult related to information behavior and information management. We also
encourage others to share insights on this paper. We are considering setting up a Wikipedia
entry on Taylor’s Value-Added Model in order to facilitate interaction and discussion and to
publicly and collectively further develop the model. We also encourage others to engage in
follow-up studies and share results with us and through various forms of publication.
Our preference for applying and testing the model across situations involves field-based research
in businesses, particularly information oriented start-up companies. We envision both qualitative
(case study) approaches as well as qualitative data gathering related to users and situations in
terms of User Criteria, Values Added, and System Processes. Here too, we hope that other
researchers will consider using the model in user behavior and systems studies.
Development and research related to educational programs will involve working with faculty and
students across information schools, programs, and courses. This paper is a first effort to share
our thoughts and experiences with the broader information field and education community. Our
hope is that this paper will serve to raise interest in using the model in courses and programs. If
there is interest, we would be interested in forming an online community interested in sharing
ideas, materials, and approaches. This might be followed by a systematic study of the usefulness
and impact of the model in information education programs.

Eisenberg/Dirks 2008 p. 13

References
Metzger, Miriam M. (2007) “Making sense of credibility on the Web: Models for evaluating
online information and recommendations for future research,” Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology. Hoboken: Nov 2007. Vol. 58, Iss. 13; p. 2078
Saracevic, Tefko. (2007) “Relevance: A review of the literature and a framework for thinking on
the notion in information science. Part II: nature and manifestations of relevance,” Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology. Hoboken: Nov 2007. Vol. 58, Iss. 13;
p. 1915
Schamber, Linda. (1994) “Relevance and information behavior,” In: Annual review of
information science and technology, v29, 1994. Learned Information, 1994
Taylor, Robert S. (1968) “Question Negotiation and the Reference Process,” College & Research
Libraries, 29 (3): 178-194 1968.
Taylor, Robert S. (1986) Value Added Processes in Information Systems, Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Authors:
Michael B. Eisenberg
Dean Emeritus and Professor
The Information School of the University of
Washington
Box 352840, Seattle, WA 98195-2840
Phone: (206) 616-1152
mbe@u.washington.edu
http://www.ischool.washington.edu/mbe

Lee Dirks
Director, Scholarly Communication
Technical Computing / External Research
Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, WA 98052
(425) 703-6866 - office
ldirks@microsoft.com
http://www.microsoft.com/science

