The d-school in the i-school: HCI and Design Research

J.M. Carroll, S.R. Haynes, F. E. Ritter, M.B. Rosson, X. L. Zhang

College of Information Sciences and Technology

The Pennsylvania State University

In the context of a campus-wide strategic planning process, we have been
asked to frame the special role of Penn State's Center for
Human-Computer Interaction (CHCI) within the College of Information
Sciences and Technology (IST). Our response is that HCI should fulfill
an important role as a focus for design research within our i-school. As
support for this response we explore the following propositions:

1. Design research and design science are essential to i-schools.

2. HCI is historically, currently, and inherently a design science of
the just right sort to contribute to i-schools.

3. Other constituencies/subunits of i-schools (CS, IS, LIS, STS) are not
design sciences, but benefit from organizational proximity of HCI design
research.

In this brief paper, we sketch the argument entailed by these
propopsitions. Our objective is to better understand and articulate the
role of HCI and design research in i-schools.

Design research is essential to i-schools

I-schools span the information disciplines to comprehensively address
issues ranging from image processing to social policy. In this vast
spectrum, design—defined here as materializing information to support
human activity—is a fulcrum. One cannot talk about information
processing, storage and retrieval, information behavior, the use of
information in groups, organizations, or in society, or information
economics, policy, and regulation without making strong and substantive
assumptions about the specific ways that information can be presented to
and manipulated by people. Indeed, whenever there is evolution in user
interfaces and application services, other concepts and relations
throughout information science must be rethought.

There are perfectly coherent and time-tested information disciplines
that eschew a central concern with design as we define it. The core of
Computer Science (CS) is focused on information processing, storage and
retrieval; presentation and manipulation of information by people, and
the design process itself, are peripheral topics in CS. Library
Information Science (LIS) has traditionally focused on information
retrieval and information seeking at the individual level, while
Information Systems (IS) has focused on organizational processes and the
impacts of information access and use. But neither has focused on
framing and implementing specific design strategies to ameliorate or
enhance observed circumstances through transforming human-computer
interactions.

The broad vision of i-schools requires coordination of understanding
information structures, needs, and impacts with the design of new
human-computer interactions. Design and the artifacts that result from
design activity represent an important class of boundary objects for
knowledge and technology transfer between disciplines and between
academe and industry/government. Designs integrate and reify theory and
empirical knowledge into technologies that can be exchanged,
implemented, and their effects assessed within different contexts and
from different perspectives. Similarly, designs and artifacts help
demonstrate the potential utility of research products.

HCI is the right kind of design science

Until the emergence of HCI during the 1980s, the roles for social,
cognitive and behavioral science within technology development were few
and marginal. The discipline of human factors, institutionalized within
Industrial Engineering or Applied Psychology, emerged a generation
before HCI, but it was most concerned with human performance and
experience with existing technology tools and systems, and focused on
artifacts with limited information content (e.g., stairs, furniture,
physical tools). This evaluation role was often positioned too late in
the system development process to have more than minor effects on the
design of the technology or on the core applications of technology. 

Science and Technology Studies (STS), institutionalized variously in
philosophy and sociology; LIS, typically a standalone academic unit,
some of which have developed into i-schools; Communication Studies, and
IS, institutionalized in business schools; all have provided
descriptions of how technology is utilized across a broad range of
significant organizational and utilitarian contexts. Particularly in the
case of STS, these were often rich analyses of how new technology is
shaped by use, and how it reciprocally shapes human practices,
relationships, and institutions. Such efforts contribute much to
understanding the context of information technology design problems and
solutions, but they are even more distant from the activities of system
design and development than human factors efforts. And unfortunately
technologists were largely unaware that these fields of interest even
existed.

In this context, HCI is quite novel. It has been most often
institutionalized as an adjunct to, sometimes even within, Computer
Science. Its research methods integrate the creation of new techniques,
technology, and applications with iterative and formative evaluation of
their immediate and indirect impacts on collective and individual human
activity and experience. The close coordination of creating innovative
technology and assessing its consequences for human activity has proven
very successful, and has led to transformative applications–desktop
user interfaces, the mouse and carefully engineered pointing devices,
hypermedia online information, a variety of information visualizations,
high quality synthetic speech, and levels of user control of software
systems that were unimaginable two decades ago. 

Indeed, a paradigm of innovation and application of interactive
technologies cyclically coupled to improvisation and assessment in human
activity has been incorporated into academic programs in geo-science,
IS, CS, LIS, and i-schools, and is generally called HCI. However, this
paradigm is not itself a discipline, and when it is incorporated into
specific information technology disciplines and projects it is typically
narrowed to the scope of that discipline or project. For example, HCI in
CS most typically means research on software architectures or tools that
enable new user interface techniques. We propose that only in i-schools
can HCI operate with the appropriate scope to be effective as a design
science (see also Carroll et al., 2006). 

Other i-school constituencies benefit

Incorporating HCI into i-schools yields many benefits for other i-school
constituencies, while at the same time broadening and enriching HCI
design research. Already the combination of HCI and LIS in i-schools has
led to richer conceptions of human-centered design that encompass both
the measurement orientation of HCI and the integration of information,
organization, technology, policy, and culture of LIS. The interaction of
HCI with community informatics has promoted design research that
addresses new sorts of public access information systems, and has
produced a more finely articulated view of people as the central factor
in the interactions between people, information, and technology at
different levels of social aggregation. 

Traditional CS research considers underlying technologies but rarely
addresses design in the sense of envisioning new tools and activities
for people. Instead CS design efforts are more likely to lead to
self-consistent functionality with unknown implications for people and
their activity (e.g., a programming language), or perhaps to a
proof-of-concept prototype application that demonstrates a plausible use
of a novel technology or technique. Incorporating HCI expertise in such
work ensures that the design of effective applications is a first-order
concern, and helps to coordinate the development of new technologies
with new measurement techniques they necessitate. 

IS has an inherent orientation toward action science and affecting
change, but generally has accomplished this through organizational
interventions of training, management, and technology acquisition. The
ability to design and implement new forms of human-computer interactions
as part of IS interventions is a powerful enhancement. Other
constituencies, like STS, that have traditionally played even more
peripheral roles with respect to technology (e.g., focusing on impacts
or critically deconstructing meanings) can participate in a more
directive fashion when supported by colleagues who do this as a central
element of their technical work. 

Our construal of the role of HCI in i-schools — as an anchor for
design research — has more general implications for how we think of
i-school faculty groups. For example, at Penn State, we have often
identified faculty groupings concerned with "people and technology",
"people and information", or "information and technology". Not
surprisingly, such distinctions do little to energize engagement across
groupings. Perhaps differentiating faculty groups based on how they
pursue research questions in the i-space (which is a nexus of
information, technology and people), and equally important, how their
methods and approaches can complement others would be more productive. 

Reference

Carroll, J.M. Dourish, P., Friedman, B., Kurosu, M., Olson, G.M. &
Sutcliffe, A.G. 2006. Institutionalizing HCI: What do i-schools offer?
Extended Abstracts of ACM CHI 2006: Conference on Human Factors of
Computing Systems (April 22-27, Montreal). New York: ACM Press, pgs
17-20.

