The Role of the Arts in an iSchool Education
Robert Heckman

Jaime Snyder

School of Information Studies
Syracuse University
320 Hinds Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
315-443-1892

School of Information Studies
Syracuse University
337 Hinds Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
315-751-3977

rheckman@syr.edu

jasnyd01@syr.edu

ABSTRACT
Professional education in Information Schools is predominantly
technical and based on a rational, scientific way of thinking about
the world. In this essay we make the argument that experience and
interaction with the arts – aesthetic experience – should play an
important role in the education of information professionals. Our
discussion of the role of the arts in an iSchool education is
structured around three basic ideas. First, we argue that the arts
offer a pathway into complementary mode of thinking and
knowing that is not only highly beneficial for the technical
professions, but may also be important for the development of a
competitive future work force. We refer to this as an artistic mode
of knowing, and we discuss both terminology and the
characteristics in this section. Second, we build on the ideas of
Grant and others that focus on the organizational and societal
importance of collaboration among individuals with diverse
specialized knowledge. We describe how the skills needed for
successful interdisciplinary collaboration are increasingly drawing
on both ways of knowing. Third, we argue that much of the work
done by information professionals has more in common than
would first appear with the work done by design professionals and
creative and performing artists, and thus is amenable to the
pedagogical techniques employed in those fields. We conclude
by offering specific iSchool examples of arts-based pedagogy and
include suggestions for incorporating these ideas into an existing
curriculum.

Topics
Nature and scope of iSchools and iResearch

Keywords
arts, aesthetics, studio learning, information professionals,
iSchools

1. INTRODUCTION
In this essay we make the argument that experience and
interaction with the arts – aesthetic experience – should play an
important role in the education of information professionals. We
argue that this interaction will provide a useful and necessary
complement to the more familiar rational, scientific model that
currently informs iSchool professional education, and discuss the
principles inherent in an arts-based approach to learning in
iSchools.
Professional education in Information Schools is predominantly
technical and based on a rational, scientific way of thinking about
the world. Our students learn the skills required for effective
librarianship, information systems development, and network
administration, among others, and it is entirely appropriate that
the primary focus of a professional education be on the technical
knowledge and skill that professionals must master. But beyond
technical competence, successful professionals also require the
ability to interpret complex and ambiguous situations, interact
with those expert in other forms of specialized knowledge, and
constructively evaluate their own work and the work of others.
These abilities call for an approach to knowing the world that
complements the knowledge provided by a rational, scientific
approach. This approach to knowing is characterized by intuitive
understanding, emotional sensitivity, catharsis, metaphor and
analogy. Bruner [1] proposes that the experience of art promotes
an integrated, holistic view of phenomena that is a useful
complement to analytic knowing.
We structure our discussion of the role of the arts in an iSchool
education around three basic ideas. First, we argue that the arts
offer a pathway into complementary mode of thinking and
knowing that is not only highly beneficial for the technical
professions, but may also be important for the development of a
competitive future work force. We refer to this as an artistic mode
of knowing, and we discuss terminology and describe this mode
here. Second, we build on the ideas of Grant [2] and others that
focus on the organizational and societal importance of
collaboration among individuals with diverse specialized
knowledge. We describe how the skills needed for successful
interdisciplinary collaboration are increasingly drawn from
diverse ways of knowing. Third, we argue that much of the work
done by information professionals has more in common than
would first appear with the work done by design professionals and
creative and performing artists, and thus is amenable to the
pedagogical techniques employed in those fields.

We explore these three assertions in detail in Sections 2, 3 and 4
of this paper. In Section 5 we offer a specific iSchool example of
arts-based pedagogy and include suggestions for incorporating
these ideas into an existing curriculum.

2. SCIENTIFIC AND ARTISTIC MODES
OF KNOWING
For the past two centuries, specialized technical workers have
relied on an approach to thinking and knowing derived from the
scientific method of acquiring knowledge.
This scientific
approach has resulted in valuable technology that has allowed us
to produce complex and sophisticated tools. It has created
improvements in health, prosperity and standard of living that are
unprecedented in human history. However, the unintended side
effects of our technological revolution (e.g. potential for mass
destruction, climate change, etc.) make it clear that the ability to
use technology effectively does not necessarily evolve directly
from the scientific approach to knowing that allows us to make
technology. In this section, we briefly sketch the outlines of an
approach to thinking, knowing, and understanding that we believe
can serve as a highly useful complement to the scientific approach
to gaining knowledge.
We label this approach the artistic mode of knowing in order to
emphasize its distinctness from the scientific approach, but we
recognize that the label has the potential to mislead. The two ways
of knowing we consider do not represent a pure dichotomy, but
rather lie on a continuum, with most thinking and knowing taking
place somewhere in the middle, and employing both modes in
varying degrees. Our objective is to promote a mode of thinking
and knowing that operates in terms of a “both-and” opportunity
rather than an “either-or” choice. Art historian James Elkins is
promoting a similarly holistic approach in his book entitled The
Domain of Images where he makes an argument for an inclusive
study of images, both those deemed as art and those seen as more
utilitarian (such as images used in science). In fact, he devotes
several pages to discussing the inadequacy of many if not all
art/non-art monikers, examining (and ultimately finding fault
with) a range of terms for non-art images including: scientific,
nonreligious, inexpressive, non- or extra-aesthetic, utilitarian,
informational, nonrepresentational, schematic and notational [3].
Ultimately he finds a distinction based on practice to be the most
useful for his purposes: art images are those generally studied by
art historians. Non-art images are not. We have followed a
similarly pragmatic approach to clarifying our distinction between
artistic and scientific ways of knowing and thinking about
problems. While we continue to search for the perfect terms for
these two modes, we will let these terms stand for the moment and
move on to describe in more detail what each represent in terms
of this research.
We begin by presenting in bullet form a series of distinctions
between the two modes of knowing and thinking:
 Scientific thinking discriminates between and analyzes
details. Artistic thinking synthesizes details into a single
holistic pattern.
 Scientific knowing focuses on category; artistic knowing
focuses on relationship.
 Scientific knowing relies on analysis; artistic knowing relies
on synthesis
 Scientific knowing segregates; artistic knowing integrates.

 Scientific knowing is sequential, literal, functional, textual,
and analytic.
 Artistic knowing is simultaneous, metaphorical, aesthetic,
contextual, and synthetic [4].
There is a persistent but disconnected stream of research and
argument that supports the need for a mode of thinking and
knowing to complement the scientific model that dominates
professional higher education. For example, there is growing
collection of literature that recognizes the importance of arming
management students with a broader range of skills in order to
ensure success in a competitive market [5-8]. Business school
educators are looking to the liberal arts in order to bridge the gaps
in Information System education related to people-skills [9-13].
The American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business
(AACSB), has specifically advocated the integration of liberal arts
education into the business curriculum [14].
Researchers have also begun to explore the aesthetic dimension of
information systems design. For example, Tractinsky [15] writes
of the aesthetics of the information system design object (by
aesthetics he means the common every day meeting of the term:
"an artistically beautiful or pleasing appearance”). He notes that
research in information systems has almost completely ignored
this notion of aesthetics in order to focus on robustness and
functionality, and speculates that this might be because the origins
of the computing disciplines emphasize the rational model of hard
science, efficiency, and utility. As information systems become
more interactive and place more emphasis on visual displays, he
argues that visual aesthetics should receive more research and
pedagogical attention for several reasons. First, as science and
technology provide products that dramatically exceed the
functional needs of most humans, the aesthetic dimension
becomes more important. Second, aesthetic interpretations and
evaluations are often hard to overcome because they precede and
influence reflective and cognitive interpretations. Finally, he
argues that while some aesthetic responses are innate and
relatively invariant, most are learned and depend on culture,
education, and other experiences. Because they are acquired, we
should focus on their education.
Bennett et al. [16], writing from a business management
perspective, note the research from cognitive psychology and
organizational cognition that describes human limitations in the
ability to understand and represent ambiguous concepts and
situations. This focus on the bounded rationality of human
problem solvers [17, 18] reminds us of the importance of being
able to interpretand evaluate complex, ambiguous situations
holistically, by using tools other then those that are rational, and
analytical. Because human rationality is bounded or limited, an
aesthetic way of approaching complex, ambiguous situations may
provide a number of benefits, including the ability to usefully
integrate information that at first appears to be fragmented,
unrelated and thus ambiguous. Aesthetic understanding can help
information professionals coherently interpret ambiguous
situations by illuminating the correspondences and relationships
within them.
In other discussions on how to prepare college graduates for
future professional jobs, the argument has often been made that
today's market requires graduates to possess "cross functional"
skills beyond those related to a specific professional expertise

(e.g. Business-Higher Education Forum (BHEF), 1997). Such
skills transcend professional job categories, and are often missing
in college graduates.
The cross-functional competencies
frequently identified are: leadership, teamwork, problem solving,
critical thinking, global consciousness, tolerance for ambiguity,
and basic communication skills (listening, speaking, reading, and
writing). The need for these skills is exacerbated by the fact that
the US Department of Education is forecasting a shortage of
college-educated workers in United States of more than 12 million
by the year 2020. The nation is on the verge of a critical shortage
of workers with college-level skills. The report calls for the
United States to create "a nation of learners'.

innovative initiatives. Many of these opportunities involve
working with colleagues in disciplines closely aligned with the
information field, such as computer science and business.
However, many are bringing us in contact with partners from the
humanities. Additionally, we have observed that many of the
work environments our students are entering upon leaving our
school are increasingly driven by diverse teams that include
members from a range of technology, design and marketing fields.
The longevity of this trend is supported by Grant’s [2] argument
that organizations exist to provide integrating routines that allow
individuals with diverse specialized knowledge to collaborate
effectively.

The report argues that the United States’ competitive position in
the world depends on its ability to educate a sufficient number of
workers who are able to interpret complex and ambiguous
situations, solve problems, communicate, and lead.
To
accomplish this, the nation needs major investments and major
changes in the models of higher education that are used to prepare
students for the job market.

Learning to participate in successful collaborations involves
gaining so-called “people skills,” including developing methods
for resolving conflict and acquiring the ability to articulate and
defend one’s own ideas to people not necessarily sharing the same
background or vocabulary. Exposure to the arts, as a complement
to technical training, can give our students great advantage in
these areas. Education in the arts, including literature, fine art and
music, often focuses on 1) developing tools of empathy, 2)
increasing awareness of the diversity of the human experience, 3)
honing methods for reading subtext and nuanced meaning, and 4)
cultivating an ability to interpret ambiguity from a number of
vantage points.

We propose that an arts based approach to professional education
can provide one such alternative model. Engagement with the arts
as a method for gaining understanding can help to address this
gap. Bruner [1] identifies four aspects of the experience of art
that hint at the potential benefits of this approach:
 Connectedness – interaction with the arts can generate a
synthetic response that helps one bridge the gaps between
seemingly disconnected experiences in order to discover a
cohesive view of the world.
 Effort – interaction with the arts requires work, work that
often demands departing from habitual and literal ways of
looking at things.
 Conversion of impulse –art can provide boundaries and
forums for the experience of seemingly uncontrollable
instincts or impulses, thus allowing for their exploration and
understanding in ways that would be otherwise proscribed or
inhibited.
 Generality – interaction with the arts often creates a shock of
recognition that provides an expanded view of the known
These forms of understanding involve comprehending at a deep
level, in ways that lie outside the linear, analytic mode of
scientific method. By providing opportunities to students that will
allow them to experience these dimensions of knowledge, we can
enable them to more successfully tackle socially complex and
ambiguous problems. These are precisely the types of problems
that they will likely encounter in the real world of organizational
life.

3. THE ARTS AND INTERDISCIPLINARY
COLLABORATION
Our second argument stems directly from increasingly frequent
opportunities we see at the iSchool at Syracuse University.
Occasions for interdisciplinary collaborations within the school,
within the university and across the wider academic community,
as well as potential partnerships with industry, are springing up
with great regularity. These opportunities cast a spotlight on the
need to provide our students with a diverse set of problem-solving
tools to help them build a strong and flexible set of critical
thinking skills that will enable them to take part in these

All of these skills are desirable, if not in fact necessary, in
collaborative work groups. Specifically, as we will discuss
further, exposure to a studio art working and learning
environment provides students with the opportunity to explore
diverse expressions and creative solutions in a group setting.
When these situations bear the most fruitful results, students
struggle through their own attempt to express themselves while
simultaneously interpreting and evaluating the work of their peers.
The interdependence of studio cohort members can become one of
the most generative aspects of the studio art experience. Rich
stimuli in the form of artistic content can provoke discussions
engineered to teach intellectual skills and studio-based learning
can provide an opportunity to try out these new intellectual tools
in a hands-on communal environment. The marriage of theory and
practice that marks much arts-based learning has the potential to
enhance the ability our students to work successfully in
collaborative situations.
We reinforce this argument by presenting two concrete examples
of opportunities for collaboration that would be greatly enhanced
by providing participating students with exposure to the types of
skills gained through experiences with the arts.
Colleagues at the iSchool at Syracure have been advocating the
creation of a profession devoted specifically to the support role
that information professionals play in enabling people to make the
most of new technologies. Referred to as a “cyberinfrastructure
facilitator,” one of the main responsibilities of this position is to
advocate for and enable the use of cyber-based systems, tools, and
services within any context, be it financial services, education, the
arts or sciences. Obviously a large part of this vision is ensuring
that the information professional has adequate communication
skills and a full understanding of the needs and culture of the
community that he or she is serving. We believe that arts-based
experiences in the classroom can provide students with a forum to
hone these skills and learn how to process diverse perspectives.

Another good example of the type of multidisciplinary project that
would benefit from students well-versed in arts-informed learning
is an initiative led by Michael McAllister, Director of Innovation
and Design at the School of Art and Design within the College of
Visual and Performing Arts (VPA) at Syracuse. He is advocating
for the creation of a multimedia design center on campus that will
enable students to get hands-on experience solving real design
problems within the Syracuse community. In response to specific
needs within the local community, such as education, outreach to
underrepresented groups within the city, and small
business/entrepreneurial startup programs, students will propose,
develop and, importantly, implement large-scale multimedia
projects. The program intends to bring together VPA students
with those from the iSchool, as well as business, media and public
policy areas. By partnering with VPA, we would provide our
students with the chance to propose, facilitate and implement
technology-driven solutions to an array of real world information
problems.
The contributions that our information students could make to
these projects are significant, not to mention the value that they
would get from participating. But in order to make the most of
these experiences, we need to make sure that we are teaching
them the skills necessary to communicate and function within
these diverse teams. We should not neglect our responsibility to
make sure our students are properly prepared to fully participate
in innovative programs like this, both while they are here at the
iSchool and after they graduate.
In fact, we argue that many of the skills that are needed to take
full advantage of opportunities like these are very successfully
taught by utilizing the studio-based approach (described below)
that advocates peer interactions, critical thinking, thoughtful and
thought-provoking experimentation and openness to alternative
solutions. These are also the same skills that many of our students
will need when they enter the work force and find themselves
working in multidisciplinary teams tackling similar problems.

4. THE CYCLE OF
PROFESSIONAL WORK
Our third argument is that the work processes of technical
professionals have much in common with those of design
professionals and creative and performing artists. As a result,
pedagogical approaches that have been found effective in
education for the arts can also have a role in the education of
iProfessionals. And just as the arts are becoming increasingly
experimental and digital, so also are the information professions.
For example, the iProfessional of the future may have to do much
more than write a memo, a report, or make a standup presentation
in order to communicate effectively.
As professional
communication increasingly gravitates to "new media," skills for
professionals may come to rely increasingly on what we refer to
here as the artistic mode of knowing and thinking.
While organizations strive for a controlled and predictive state of
operation, they also demand innovation and invention as a means
to increase resources and ultimately gain advantage.
By
recognizing that iProfessionals require the ability to use both
creative thinking and scientific rigor when confronting challenges,
a technical education informed by arts-based practice can benefit
both individuals and organizations.

Generalizing across many technical professions (e.g. librarianship,
information systems design, software engineering, medicine
accounting, engineering, etc.) Figure 1 illustrates four generic
dimensions of professional work: production, performance,
interpretation, and critique. Technical professionals may cycle
iteratively through all fours stages in projects where they have
heavy involvement, or may participate in one or two stages where
their collaborative contribution is more peripheral.

Production

Critique

Performance

Interpretation
Figure 1. Cycle of professional work
Production includes creation of professional artifacts. Software
engineers write programs. Systems analysts and engineers create
designs and specifications.
Accountants create financial
statements.
And professional workers of all types create
professional correspondence, proposals, requests for proposals,
reports, and many other graphical and textual artifacts.
Performance in the iProfessions includes explicit role-based
activities (e.g. interviewing to elicit requirements by reference
librarians and system analysts) and also ubiquitous performances
common to all professional work,(e.g. attending/conducting
meetings, interviews, presentations, etc.).
Interpretation occurs whenever professionals are called upon to
make sense of ambiguous situations, and to understand what is
going on in times of uncertainty. Each technical profession has its
own set of analytical tools, based on the rational, scientific model
to assist in this task. (e.g decision trees to aid physicians in
diagnosis, representational tools used by systems analysts to
understand and model systems) But we argue that the rational,
scientific ways of knowing that each profession brings to its field
of focus are necessary, but not sufficient when interpretation
involves complex human and organizational contexts.
Critique involves the ongoing professional responsibility to
evaluate the production and performance of self and others, and to
make judgments about the professional value of such work. Each
profession has developed rational tools to assist in this process of
evaluation (e.g cost-benefit analysis, scoring models).
Nevertheless we hear again and again that such evaluation tools
are not always sufficient to fully evaluate products and
performances in situations of high ambiguity and uncertainty, and
where costs and benefits are strategic or less tangible.
It is perhaps easier to see the commonalities between professional
and artistic production and performance due to the ubiquity of

professional artifacts and presentations. But the less obvious
similarities in the areas of interpretation and critique may prove to
be the more important because they involve skills central to
professional judgment, skills that are more elusive and difficult to
teach.

5. APPLYING AN ARTS-BASED
APPROACH TO LEARNING IN
I-SCHOOLS
At this point we introduce a practical example of how arts-related
practices can be integrated into an existing iSchool curriculum.
We divide methods for incorporating the arts into iSchool
pedagogy into two categories: content approaches and process
approaches. In future work we will discuss how to incorporate
arts related content such as novels, poems, paintings or music as
stimuli for discussion into professional courses. Examples of this
type of augmentation to standard business school curricula can be
found in the literature [10, 11, 13]. For this paper, however, we
have selected a process-oriented strategy that introduces
principles of studio art learning into a technical education
classroom.
Teaching practices commonly used in studio and performancebased pedagogy can unlock a broader spectrum of experiences for
iSchool students, without compromising other aspects of their
education. In fact, educators in a range of professional and
technical fields have sought to make use of studio-based
techniques in the classroom [19-21]. By tapping into these
practices, iSchool educators can discover new methods for
improving people skills and creating more flexible thinkers.
Studio learning environments focus on idea generation,
production and critique. It is common for problems assigned to
students to be ambiguous and equivocal. A student is expected to
create, present and defend their work in front of the class. The
class is then expected to provide thoughtful and constructive
criticism to help improve the idea. During discussion and
evaluations, there is often there no “right” answer. Students take
turns presenting what they have created and offering critique of
the work of others. Much of the learning is done “out in the
open,” within a setting that provides a shared environment for
mistakes, inventions and questions. This setting provides students
with opportunities to see multiple solutions, within a concentrated
timeframe. Potential solutions can be evaluated in real time.
Returning to the cycle of professional work, at each stage, the
specific art-based principles can be introduced via a studio
approach:
Production
Exploit communal discoveries
Be aware of iterative and incremental progress
Utilize visibility
Performance
Establish ownership
Exercise repetition
Observe results

Interpretation
Consider group and individual perspectives
Encourage tolerance for ambiguity
Explore multiplicity of meanings
Critique
Dialogue
Compare and contrast interpretations
Determine goodness of fit
Enable change and adaptation
As an example of how a studio-based approach can be applied to
an iSchool curriculum, we present an adaptation of a current
undergraduate course regularly offered by our school: IST444
Information Reporting and Presentation. An informal survey of
the curricula of other iSchools shows that many include a similar
course, designed to introduce students to basic concepts related to
successfully presenting information within a business context, in
both oral and printed form [22]. Recognizing the sheer volume of
information that the average professional handles in a typical
work environment, this course provides students with tools,
strategies and experience in making presentations with skill and
competence. The course is designed to cover basic graphic design
skills and software, and to provide regular opportunities for 3 to 5
minute oral presentations. Students delivery speeches, create
information graphics, evaluate and discuss examples of printed
and digital information.
With the permission of the IST444 professor of record, Susan
Bonzi, we have reviewed the course syllabus and identified
opportunities to align this class with the four stage cycle of
professional work presented above. A studio-based iteration of
the course, as described below, will be piloted in the fall of 2008
by the second author.
A typical instantiation of IST444 might follow a schedule similar
to the one shown below (see Table 1), with individual and group
presentations occurring throughout the semester. Notably the
course is designed to introduce specific key concepts and provide
introductory exposure to common graphics software. As such, the
course takes a linear approaching, tackling each topic in sequence.
The cumulative effect for students is exposure to all of the
objective skills and techniques related to information presentation
and reporting.
The IST444 course is well suited to incorporating a studio-based
approach. Currently, students work in small groups to create
profiles for fictional businesses and each group is expected to
generate materials for their company during the course of the
semester. Instruction in public speaking is an important aspect of
the course and these mock businesses provide content for a series
of oral presentations that emulate real-world business situations.
Concurrently, graphic design issues related to creating business
documents such as resumes, letterhead and business cards are
discussed. The class is structured to allow significant time for
individual and group oral presentations while concurrently
introducing information presentation guidelines and basic
instruction in software such as Adobe Creative Suite and
Macromedia Flash.

Table 1.Typical class structure for IST444 Information
Presentation and Reporting
Weekly topics

Phase of professional
work cycle addressed

Individual and Group Presentations
(take place throughout the semester)

Performance, Critique

Graphic Basics
Type
Logos
Types of speeches
Constructing a speech
Presenting a speech
Photoshop Basics
Advanced Photoshop
Basic Page design
In Design basics
Advanced inDesign
Letter head, business cards
Brochures
Newsletters
Color, Paper
Resumes
Charts and graphs
Info graphics
Concept mapping
Web Page design
Flash

Production
Production
Production
Performance
Performance
Performance
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production
Production

Our goal in redesigning the course offerings is to generate a more
cyclical plan that iteratively guides students through the four
stages of professional work:
1. Production– Students generate ideas and objects.
2. Performance Students present those ideas to their peers in a
variety of formats
3. Interpretation– Students analyze peer presentations in a
formal setting
4. Critique– Students evaluate the success of the presentations
based on collective analysis and on their own experiences
and opinions
Because the course already includes a degree of Production,
Performance and Critique (see designations, Table 1), our focus is
on introducing elements related to Interpretation, as well as
restructuring course content to reinforce the creative cycle that
underlies much studio-based course work.
Our alternate plan for the course, based on a studio approach,
covers the same material over the course of the same amount of
time, and exploits the power of repetition and iteration that is
common to studio courses. Instead of the linear format shown
above, the course could be organized as a series of iterative
cycles, stepping students through the work cycle multiple times
and while increasing exposure to skills of interpretation. Such a
course might look something like this (Table 2):

Table 2. Example of IST444 Information Presentation and
Reporting based on a studio approach
Topic
Present yourself
Create a profile for yourself
Present a resume
Alter your resume for different jobs or
situations
Evaluate peer resumes
Create a company profile
Come up with an idea for a company
Pitch your company to the group
Evaluate the strengths and weakness of
your company
Group discussion

Phase of professional
work cycle
Production
Performance
Interpretation
Critique

Production
Performance
Interpretation
Critique

Create a brand identity for your company
Branding and logo
Production
Run a focus group
Performance
Participate in a focus group
Interpretation
Group discussion
Critique
Present a product offered by your company
Create an advertisement for a product
Production
Present the product to the group
Performance
Compare your product to competitors
Interpretation
Group discussion
Critique
While the specific skills and exposure to software are virtually the
same as the more traditional linear approach, the iterative cycle
allows students to become more familiar with the cycle itself and
this integrated view of the process “in-action” will itself be a
valuable tool.
We have heard from instructors who have tried this type of
approach that the last two steps merge together and, in the worst
cases, result in dead-end statements from students such as, “I like
it.” One of the challenges of adopting this approach is to maintain
a distinct separation between the analysis of a presentation, be it a
speech or a resume, and the ultimate evaluation of its worth
within a given context. For example, a group analysis of a
specific logo may reveal that half the class deems it “childish”
while the other half sees it as “whimsical.” Arriving at that
conclusion would be achieved during the Interpretation phase of
the cycle. However, when we move onto critique and we look at
the company for which the logo was created, say a company that
makes computer game consoles designed for adult users, we can
then start to make value judgments. That is when we may
conclude that a whimsical logo may be better suited than a
childish one for specific reasons related to the target audience
profile that was part of the initial company profile, and a
discussion of how to optimize the graphic could follow.

It is also important to stress that this approach does not need to
assume that students are or will be graphic designers. While
students’ mechanical skills with software and visual design
abilities may be limited, the stress here is on process and problem
solving. Many of these students will at some point in their
professional careers be interacting with experts in marketing and
design. One of our goals is to provide them with the vocabulary
and communication skills necessary to successfully collaborate
with these other professionals, in order to make the most of the
expertise around them. Additionally, and just as importantly, by
providing information students with insight into a creative
process, we will potentially enable them to participate more fully
in these partnerships, making a wider impact by bringing their
knowledge of information technology into new areas.

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.

6. CONCLUSION
11.
In this paper we have argued that experience and interaction with
the arts should play an important role in the education of
information professionals, and that this interaction will provide a
useful and necessary complement to the more familiar rational,
scientific model that currently informs iSchool professional
education. We discussed the principles inherent in an arts-based
approach to learning in iSchools. We showed how the work done
by information professionals is similar to the work done by
creative and performing artists, and those in the design
professions. Finally, we offered an example of how an iSchool
course is being redesigned using these ideas.
We hope this brief account serves as a stimulus for others to
consider, debate, and modify these ideas. If an arts-based
approach to technical and professional education is to bear fruit,
much research and development must be done. In future work we
will propose research and practical agendas to carry these ideas
forward. The arts are moving in new directions, and information
professions are moving into unknown territory as well. As the
experimental arts evolve to include digital media, computer
animation, computer music, sound art, and many novel
combinations [23], so also are the information professions
evolving to include unexpected collaborations with colleagues
from other fields and opportunities to make contributions across
many social and organizational contexts. We believe that the
educational approach we have outlined will prepare our students
to meet these challenges.

References
1. Bruner, J., On Knowing: Essays for the left hand. 1962,
Cambridge, UK: Beklnap Press of Harvard University Press.
2. Grant, R.M., Toward a knowledge-based theory of the firm.
Strategic Management Journal, 1996. 17(10): p. 109-22.
3. Elkins, J., The domain of images. 1999: Cornell University
Press London.
4. Pink, D.H., A Whole New Mind. Riverhead, New York, NY,
2005.
5. Adler, N.J., The Arts & Leadership: Now That We Can Do
Anything, What Will We do? Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 2006. 5(4): p. 486-499.

12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.

20.
21.

22.
23.

Bartunek, J.M. and I. Carboni, A Time for Hope: A
Response to Nancy Adler. Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 2006. 5(4): p. 500-504.
Tung, R.L., Of Arts, Leadership, Management Education,
adn Management Research: A Commentary on Nancy
Adler's "The Arts & Leadership: Now That We Can Do
Anything, What Will We Do?" Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 2006. 5(4): p. 505-511.
Denning, P.J. and R. Dunham, The Core of the Third-Wave
Professional. Communications of the ACM, 2001. 44(11):
p. 21-25.
Weick, C.W., Out of Context: Using Metaphor to
Encourage Creative Thinking. Journal of Management
Education, 2003. 27(3): p. 323-343.
Morris, J.A., J. Urbanski, and J. Fuller, Using Poetry and
the Visual Arts to Develop Emotional Intelligence. Journal
of Management Education, 2005. 29(6): p. 888-904.
Short, J.C. and J. David J. Ketchen, Teaching Timeless
Truths Through Classic Literature: Aesop's Fables and
Strategic Management. Journal of Management Education,
2005. 29(6): p. 816-832.
Dunne, D. and R. Martin, Design Thinking and How It Will
Change Management Education. Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 2006. 5(4): p. 512-523.
Weinrauch, J.D., An Exploratory Use of Musical Metaphors
to Enhance Student Learning. Journal of Marketing
Education, 2005. 27(2): p. 109-121.
Harrison, J.K. and H. Akinc, Lessons in Leadership from
the Arts and Literature: A Liberal Arts Approach to
Management Education through Fifth Discipline Learning.
Journal of Management Education, 2000. 24(3): p. 391-413.
Tractinsky, N., Toward the study of aesthetics in
information technology. Proceedings Twenty-Fifth
International Conference on Information Systems, 2004: p.
771–780.
Bennett, R.H., The Mind’s Eye and the Practice of
Management Envisioning the Ambiguous Robert H.
Bennett, Walter J. Wheatley, E. Nick Maddox, William P.
Anthony The Authors. Management Decision, 1994. 32(2):
p. 21-29.
March, J.G. and H.A. Simon, Organizations. 1958: John
Wiley & Sons Inc.
Simon, H.A. and J.R. Hayes, Understanding complex task
instructions. Cognition and instruction, 1976: p. 269-285.
Lister, B.C. Interactive Distance Learning: The Virtual
Studio Classroom. in Proceedings of the Third
International IEEE Conference on Multimedia, Engineering
and Education. 1998. Hong Kong.
Lister, B.C., Next Generation Studio: A New Model for
Interactive Learning. Syllabus Northeast, 2001.
Wilson, J.M. and W.C. Jennings, Studio Courses: How
Information Technology Is Changing the Way We Teach,
On Campus and Off. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2000. 88(1):
p. 72-80.
Bonzi, S., Coure syllabus for IST-444 Information
Reporting and Presentation. 2007, School of Information
Studies, Syracuse University.
Monaghan, P., Where High Tech Meets High Concept.
Chronicle of Higher Education, 2007. 53(25): p. 1.

