The Role of e-Infrastructures in the Transformation of
Research Practices and Outcomes
Eric T. Meyer

Ralph Schroeder

William H. Dutton

Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford
1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK
Tel +44 (0) 1865 287210

eric.meyer@oii.ox.ac.uk ralph.schroeder@oii.ox.ac.uk william.dutton@oii.ox.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine transformations that have taken place in
e-Research, and address the potential for additional
transformations as e-Research develops and matures. The notion
of a transformation in e-Research can operate on many levels:
transformations in the tools used to conduct research,
transformations in projects that enable new types of e-Research,
transformations to ordinary scientific practice, transformations in
the types of scientific questions that can be asked and able to be
asked, and transformations in the scientific imagination. While
much of the current rhetoric implies that e-Research will
transform the very nature of science, other types of less-pervasive
transformations are more evident at these relatively early stages in
the development of e-Research infrastructures, and some evidence
supports the idea that continuity has been more common in the
ordinary scientific practice of e-Research rather than
transformation. The data from this paper draws on the work of
the Oxford e-Social Science project (OeSS).

Topics
Information infrastructure development
Information policy, ethics and law

Keywords
e-Research, e-Social Science,
information infrastructure

scientific

transformation,

http://www.nsf.gov/od/oci/reports.jsp). In the U.K., the ESRC
National Centre for e-Social Science (NCeSS) has recently
awarded its second round of funding to projects aimed at
understanding the requirements for grid-enabled e-Social Science
and developing tools for e-Research [19]. Other specific gridbased computing projects aimed at enabling e-Science and eSocial science projects abound in the U.S., U.K., E.U., and
elsewhere.
Much of the language about these new scientific information
infrastructures stresses that many funding bodies view e-Research
as a way to transform scientific practice. The National Science
Foundation (NSF), for instance, has recently revised “the
intellectual merit review criterion to specifically include language
on potentially transformative research” [20]. Although language
indicating the potential for e-Research to be transformative
abounds, very little work has examined the extent to which this
potential is being realized.
The notion of a transformation in e-Research can operate on many
levels: transformations in the tools used to conduct research,
transformations in projects that enable new types of e-Research,
transformations to ordinary scientific practice, transformations in
the types of scientific questions that can be asked and able to be
asked, and transformations in the scientific imagination. While
much of the current rhetoric implies that e-Research will
transform the very nature of science, other types of less-pervasive
transformations are more evident at these relatively early stages in
the development of e-Research infrastructures. In this paper, we
examine some of the transformations that have taken place in eResearch, but we also address the potential for various
transformations as e-Research develops and matures.

1. INTRODUCTION

2. SOCIAL SHAPING OF E-RESEARCH

There are major efforts underway in the United States, United
Kingdom, Europe, and elsewhere to build scientific infrastructure
to enable e-Research.
In the U.S., the NSF Office of
Cyberinfrastructure is engaged in an ambitious programme aimed
at encouraging and developing cyberinfrastructure in a variety of
science and social science domains (see, for example,

2.1. OeSS: Oxford e-Social Science Project
The Oxford e-Social Science Project (OeSS) is a node of the
National Centre for e-Social Science (NCeSS). NCeSS was
established with UK Economic and Social Research Council
(ESRC) funding in April 2004 “to act as the central resource base
for e-social science issues and activities in the UK…[and to]
provide a one-stop shop for awareness raising, expertise, training,
technical infrastructure, data resources, computer facilities and
user-support for e-social science research” [3]. To do this, a
central hub was established at the University of Manchester, and
eight individual nodes were funded in 2005 for an initial three
year period; NCeSS also funded twelve smaller pilot projects that
ran for short periods ranging from 9-18 months. In 2008, a
second round of three-year funding was announced which
included continuing support for the OeSS node through 2011.

Seven of the initial nodes are primarily concerned with creating
demonstrator projects which show the potential of e-Social
Science in a variety of domains. The OeSS node is somewhat
different than the others: rather than creating software tools to
enable e-Social Science, the OeSS node studies the social shaping
of e-Research. In particular, it focuses on the social, institutional,
legal, and ethical contexts that shape the development and
adoption of new technologies. It does this work by examining
how various e-science and e-social science projects develop and
change over time, including cases drawn from the other NCeSS
nodes and cases from outside of the NCeSS project.

2.2. OeSS Cases and Themes
The OeSS project is currently in the process of conducting
ongoing case studies in several e-Research domains. Each of the
case studies involves examining one or more specific projects
engaged in developing tools to enable e-Research in a specific
domain, and each of these cases also contributes to the
investigation of a number of themes in specific areas (including
ethics and trust, intellectual property, openness of access, and
disciplinarity). An attempt is also made to distribute the cases
across a wide range; in social science, this includes qualitative
social science, quantitative social science, geospatial modelling
and simulation, and web 2.0 collaborative e-Social Science. The
methods for this research are a mix of qualitative and quantitative
methods, including interviews both with project personnel and the
users of their scientific tools, observation of how the tools are
implemented, analysis of supporting documentation, and a
quantitative survey of U.K. social scientists about their use of eSocial Science tools and their attitudes toward e-Social Science in
general.
While these case studies are still ongoing, in this paper we will
describe an illustrative case and discuss examples of some of the
cross-cutting issues and themes that are emerging across a variety
of cases. Finally, we will draw some initial conclusions about
how this research helps to illustrate social shaping in e-Research.

2.2.1. Geo-spatial modelling and simulation: GeoVue
GeoVue is an NCeSS node funded for both phase I and phase II
of NCeSS. The project is based at the University College of
London’s Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis (UCL-CASA),
where Mike Batty is the principal investigator. GeoVue’s central
focus is making tools that allow the fast and easy creation of maps
that include data elements for visualizing geo-spatial data. One
example of the node’s output is the Virtual London demonstrator
(see Figure 1), which offered users a virtual fly-through of
London using the Google Earth viewer as a platform.

When GeoVue created Virtual London, the target audience they
had in mind was primarily urban planners and policy makers.
Virtual London was designed not only to create a useful 3dimension map of London, but also to allow overlaying data. For
example, local governments could overlay pollution readings and
visualize areas where pollution abatement measures are most
needed. Once the application was completed the project attracted
the attention of Google, who expressed an interest in including it
in the Google Earth viewer so that users anywhere could have
access to Virtual London.
It is at this point in the story that institutional and legal
arrangements intervened and prevented the public release of
Virtual London. The Virtual London application, while it was
built in the Google Earth viewer, relied on the Ordnance Survey’s
MasterMap data to build the 3-D projections of buildings.
Ordnance Survey is the national agency of the British government
that is “responsible for the official, definitive surveying and
topographic mapping of Great Britain” [21]. In order to include
Virtual London in Google Earth, Google would have had to
obtain permission to use the Ordnance Survey data underlying the
application. Ordnance Survey data, however, is protected by
Crown Copyright, which covers all works “made by an officer or
servant of the Crown in the course of his duties” [2]. This is in
sharp contrast to the situation in the United States, where
“copyright protection … is not available for any work of the
United States Government” [1]. Because works created by
federal agencies are not subject to copyright protection in the
U.S., data created can be used by individuals and by organizations
wishing to put it to use. In the U.K., that is not the case – the
Ordnance Survey data must be licensed for use.
In the case of Virtual London, Google was willing to pay for a
license, and indicated that the actual amount wasn’t really too
much of a concern. According to a GeoVue staff member,
“Google were willing to pay whatever it took, yeah. That was the
whole point. They would pay whatever Ordnance Survey said …
[But] Ordnance Survey wouldn’t budge for any price” [Interview
3 Oct 2007]. The only possible price the Ordnance Survey was
able to offer was £1.50 “per click” which was not possible in
Google Earth where this type of clicking is not part of the
interface. In Google Earth, the user zooms and flies (virtually)
through the space. Neither Ordnance Survey nor Google were
able to suggest an equitable way of measuring the uses of Virtual
London. Even though later discussions took place among
GeoVue, Google and the Ordnance Survey, in January 2008 a
member of the GeoVue project team indicated that he had given
up on holding out much hope for getting Virtual London released
and had moved on to other projects [Personal conversation 16 Jan
2008]. It can be added that throughout the duration of the project,
there was a high profile campaign led by The Guardian newspaper
to open access to the Ordnance Survey and other government
data, a campaign which is still ongoing1. In other words, the issue
of Ordnance Survey access was not limited to the GeoVue
project, but part of a wider debate in the UK.
This case is a clear illustration of the legal and institutional issues
that can erect barriers to sharing data and implementing eResearch projects. It is often assumed that many projects fail to

Figure 1: Virtual London (Source: Hudson-Smith [13])

1

See http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/freeourdata

achieve their goals because of technical barriers to
implementation. In the case of GeoVue, however, the GeoVue
team had successfully removed the technical barriers and had
built a functioning, effective application with the potential to have
an impact on public policy and academic research. Legal and
institutional arrangements, however, prevented Virtual London
from being released widely. The legal issues are based on
national copyright requirements, as discussed above.

them through their organization they would have faced too great a
hurdle and often decided to do without the visualization
component in their research. GeoVue and another NCeSS node,
MoSeS both have been working to make the creation of map data
much more transparent to the average scientist; in doing so, they
hope to transform the way social scientists see their data. This
potential transformation may be quite powerful, and the OeSS
project will continue to follow developments in this area2.

Institutional arrangements also came into play however. When
GeoVue and Google approached the Ordnance Survey for
permission to use the Ordnance Survey data that was used to
generate Virtual London, they ran into considerable institutional
indifference above and beyond the legal barriers. In other words,
GeoVue felt that not only was there an issue surrounding
copyright and payment for licensing, but also a feeling that
Ordnance Survey just didn’t think that such an application was of
any interest to them. This became even clearer to GeoVue project
members after they set up a sample Virtual London in their space
on Second Nature Island in the Second Life virtual world.
GeoVue felt that the Second Life Virtual London demonstrator
would be seen as a feather in the cap of the Ordnance Survey,
which was clearly identified as a source of data. The data was not
exposed in the demonstrator so it was not making it possible for
non-licensed users to obtain protected data, and GeoVue felt
Ordnance Survey could use Second Life Virtual London to show
people how their data could be used. They were taken aback, then,
when the Ordnance Survey response was a demand to
immediately remove the demonstrator or risk legal action. They
had no choice but to remove it, and replaced Virtual London with
another demonstrator, Virtual Phuket.

2.3. Cross-cutting themes and issues

In this case, several institutional and disciplinary contexts came
into conflict. GeoVue is comprised of academic geographers and
computer programmers. Like most other academics, the notion of
sharing one’s results and publishing one’s output without
expectation of direct financial reward is part of their institutional
and cultural expectations. They may also have been somewhat
naïve about the legal issues involved, as the team did not include
lawyers or copyright experts. There would have been little reason
to expect to need to include such experts, when the initial plan
was to figure out ways to combine computer programming power
with questions of interest to geographers, government planners,
and other academics. This lack of expertise, however, resulted in
being caught unaware when they came up against the government
bureaucrats and lawyers working for Ordnance Survey. Google’s
institutional culture as an American corporation also had an
effect: Google’s response was fairly typical of the stereotype of
Americans, to simply assume that throwing enough money at the
problem would cause it to go away.
While this case illustrates a constraint imposed by legal and
institutional considerations, it nevertheless also shows some of the
promise of transformation that projects such as GeoVue offer to
social scientists. In the past, the use of geospatial information has
been relatively limited because of the technical complexity of
working with map data and GIS programs. Recently, however,
and especially with the advent of the Web, there has been a surge
of interest in digital mapping techniques and combining these
with different types of data and information. For many social
scientists who wanted to include geospatial analysis and data
presentation, unless they had a GIS expert on staff or available to

The case studies in the OeSS project are designed not only to
illustrate particular cases of interest, but also to illuminate our
understanding of a variety of themes and issues that have emerged
during the first phase of the research. These themes and issues
are threads that run throughout the work, and help describe how eResearch is undergoing social shaping at this relatively early point
in the development of many e-Research projects. Among the
important themes are trust, privacy, disciplinarity, and openness.
A number of other issues are not properly called themes, per se,
but also represent important issues that occur in a variety of
projects. These issues include the difficulty of sharing data, the
limitations of geography, economic constraints, shifts in funding
models, and ways of approaching new scientific questions. In the
interests of limited space, we will touch on several of these only
briefly here.

2.3.1. Challenges for e-Research
Data sharing
Data sharing has proven to be a significant challenge for many
efforts at building collaborative infrastructures for research.
Beyond legal and institutional barriers to sharing data, such as the
GeoVue case described above, there are a variety of other issues
that arise as researchers contemplate sharing data. OeSS project
members Carusi and Jirotka, for instance, have published work
discussing how a seemingly simple data archive can become an
“ethical labrynth” [7]. Digital archives, they argue, can help
normalize scientific research by increasing accessibility,
uniformity and transparency. Archived data can also help
scientists avoid needless repetition, and enable secondary uses of
data. However, in practice much social science data resists
archiving, particularly qualitative research data. Issues such as
guarding subject privacy through anonymization can render
otherwise rich data essentially meaningless as important
relationships are stripped from sanitized data. Other contextual
information may not be apparent in the data, and secondary
researchers may mischaracterize data in ways that the original
researchers who were embedded in the social relationships under
study would not do. Re-using data for purposes beyond those
initially stated also has implications not only with regard to
informed consent agreements, but also run the risk of jeopardizing
the relationship between the original researcher and their subjects
if the subjects feel misled or duped by the subsequent uses.

2
The GeoVue and MoSeS nodes of NCeSS have merged their
efforts for phase 2 funding. This will also necessitate some
transformations in work practices, as the two nodes are located in
different cities and have been targeting somewhat different
audiences to this point.

Another major issue standing in the way of widespread data
sharing is the unresolved issue of how academic researchers can
be assigned credit and rewards for contributing scientific data to a
public archive. The reward structure of academia currently
favours publication in top peer-reviewed journals, and
subsequently having one’s work cited by other peer-reviewed
articles. Most measures of academic quality offer no credit for
having created a dataset that other researchers use, or for creating
a software package that enables research. Indexing services such
as the Web of Knowledge do not index databases. The promise of
e-Research in this area represents a potentially major
transformation in scholarly practice: should the publication of
scientific data become a standard part of the scientometric
measures that measure scientific impact and are often used in the
evaluation of researchers, departments, and organizations (see
also [5])?
Some efforts are being made to address this issue of academic
credit for data sharing. OeSS researcher Meyer has studied an
American biomedical project dealing with issues of sharing data,
the Genetic Association Information Network (GAIN) [17].
GAIN is a public-private partnership that offered academic
researchers high-quality genotyping an order of magnitude more
detailed than they had previously used in exchange for releasing
their data and blood samples for other researchers and private
organizations such as pharmaceutical companies to use. The data
distribution for GAIN is being implemented in a system called
dbGaP by the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI), a national resource established by the U.S. National
Institutes of Health. Among the features of their data distribution
site are ways of seeing the number of publications and the
authorized data requests that have been made for data (see Figure
2).

Figure 2: Selections from NCBI dbGap website
(Source: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=gap)
In Figure 2, we can see parts of the page for the Framingham
heart study portion of dbGaP. By identifying the authorized data
access requests and the publications associated with the study, the
creators of the data begin to have a way to demonstrate the impact
of their work creating the dataset. While the well-known
Framingham study certainly has many other indicators of success
available to them as well, other less well-known studies can track

who is using their data, often for the first time. While some of
these datasets may have been shared and distributed on an ad hoc
basis in the past, without a central resource to track data uses,
knowing how one’s data is used can be difficult or impossible.
Furthermore, until resources are made available for professional
management of such resources, most datasets will continue to
remain scattered across individual researcher’s hard drives and
local networks.
Again, we see a potential for transformation in scientific practice
here, one that is closer to realization through the combination of
technological enablers (the dbGaP website), scholarly incentives
(access to additional data), and economic incentives (access to
additional future funding for scientific work).
e-Science as Open Science?
Another theme of the OeSS project has been the openness -- or
otherwise -- of e-Research. One of the promises of e-Research has
been that it should enhance open access to knowledge, and thus to
“reconfigure access to knowledge” [10] in terms of allowing data
and resources from e-Research to be shared and disseminated
more freely, with fewer restrictions (for example, by means of
copyrights and patents) and perhaps using open source licensing
or similar. There has been widespread support from funding
bodies, researchers, science policy-making bodies and nongovernmental organizations for ‘open science’ and ‘open access’
policies and practices, but there has also been evidence of
resistance from stakeholders such as publishers who do not want
published material made available freely online and researchers
who do not want deposit their data immediately to share it with
others. On closer inspection then, the openness of e-Research,
widely espoused as an aim, needs to be disaggregated and its
potential and implementation in practice evaluated in a way that
goes beyond the general principle.
To do this, we can take, first, the most macro-level of e-Research,
the ‘infrastructures’ that e-Research is in the process of
developing. On this level, an attempt is being made to create
shared sets of tools and resources for researchers in and across
certain disciplines that are akin to the social infrastructures
(transport, communication) that have been created to support
social development. This trend is particularly clear in the US,
where the term cyberinfrastructure is widely used to describe
developments in e-Research. Here the support of science policy
makers and funding bodies has been critical, and much of the
effort of national and international e-Research programmes has
been devoted to infrastructure development. The efforts to make
these infrastructures ‘open’, however, must be put into an even
larger context of current conflicts over intellectual property
regimes, and the forces that are aligned to change them towards
greater openness - or to maintain the existing regimes of
restrictions and access rights. These include commercial interests,
NGOs, and policy makers, and it remains to be seen how the
current interplay of forces will shift the momentum of
infrastructural systems in one or other direction [22].
A second level are the policies and practices of individual eResearch projects: whether the materials relating to projects’
ongoing research are deposited in a common or openly shared
repository; how software tools are licensed (various options of
open source licensing); and whether data or publications resulting
from the project are made available on project webpages or other

shared repositories. A major push, especially from research
funding bodies, has been to encourage ‘open’ practices. For
example, an increasing number of funding bodies stipulate that
funded projects must make their results freely available online
(perhaps after an embargo period with exclusive rights to publish
reserved for the contributing researcher). What we found in
practice, however, according to in-depth interviews with 12
researchers on UK e-Science projects is that practices vary
considerably across projects [11]. Many projects are uncertain
about what the policies about copyright and licensing are; they
often adopt ad hoc policies with regard to which project members
have access to ongoing materials created by the project; and
finally they are in the early stages of and still unsure about
depositing outputs such as data to a common repository or
publishing results online (as opposed to via the traditional
mechanism of journals).
A third example are the shared ‘middleware’ software tools, tools
which mediate between the shared computing infrastructure and
the individual projects or end-user researchers. On this mesolevel, we can take case of the Open Middleware Infrastructure
Institute (OMII) in the UK as an example. OMII aims to create a
suite of widely adopted standard tools which are held and
maintained in a repository and made accessible to all researchers.
OMII has been promoted by the UK e-Science programme and
has also involved the collaboration of commercial software
vendors such as Microsoft and IBM. However, despite a push
towards open source licensing and standards, the practice has
been more complex [9]. It has proved difficult, for example, to
achieve standardization, and the efforts to transform the software
from the bespoke form that it has within a project into a product
that can be shared by many researchers has often proved to be
greater than creating the software in the first place.
In short, there have been major efforts to promote the openness of
e-Research, and policy debates and debates among researchers [5,
25] continue about the issues that have been described here. It is
too early to predict the outcome of a process that is still under
way, but by disaggregating ‘openness’ into a number of levels and
component parts, gathering materials on the various levels, and
identifying the tensions and forces at work, OeSS will able to
analyze this issue, locate it among the other key themes of the
projects (there are clearly connections between openness and, for
example, data sharing), and assess the implications for scientific
practices.
Open science also has the potential to transform research practices
on multiple levels. At one level, having research data openly
available enables secondary use which potentially allows less
advantaged researchers to participate in scientific discovery even
if they don’t have access to the resources necessary to gather
high-quality datasets. Of course, there are other limitations
beyond simply access to data when trying to understand why
certain scholars have greater scholarly output [18], but lowering
the barrier will potentially increase participation. At another
level, open data also exposes research data to the same sort of
peer review that scholarly publications now undergo. Currently,
there is little provision in the practice of science for datasets to
undergo peer review beyond a short methodological description in
a publication. If data becomes more open and subject to peer
review, the quality of the data being used to create scientific
knowledge will potentially be transformed for the better.

2.3.2. Constraints on e-Research
A number of the themes and issues identified by the OeSS project
pertain to constraints limiting the uptake of e-Research among
scholars. Privacy, for instance, is a serious concern to all
researchers collecting data on human subjects. While quantitative
research data is often relatively easy to anonymize and many
quantitative researchers routinely create de-identified or limited
data sets, qualitative researchers have not generally had to deal
with this issue in the past. Since few qualitative data sets were
shared outside the original research team, there was little reason
to de-identify the data. The challenge in de-identifying qualitative
data is non-trivial compared to the relative ease of simply
excluding several columns of quantitative data. Video recordings
include images of participants, audio recordings can be identified
by the sound of a person’s voice, and transcribed interview data
often includes references to other people by name and other
identifying information. It has been suggested that improving the
quality of qualitative data is an important goal for social
researchers, and that transparency about the data and the research
process are key elements to doing so [6]. The question of how to
share such rich data while continuing to protect the identity of
research subjects, however, is a major barrier to collaboratively
sharing qualitative research data. Whether the promise of gains
offered by collaboratively sharing qualitative research data is
great enough to overcome these constraints remains to be seen; if
it is, it would potentially mark a major transformation in the
generally solitary and opaque manner in which much qualitative
data is collected.
This also relates to another key theme being developed by OeSS
researchers Carusi and Jirotka: trust. Trust can take many forms,
and includes different sorts of trust, such as the trust people place
in artefacts, and the trust people have for those who make use of
artefacts [8]. Trust is central to human relationships in general
and to scientific collaboration in particular; without trust, people
are unlikely to share and collaborate. This is an issue for
individual researchers and research participants; on a wider level
it is also a question about people’s trust in government and
researchers generally. Even in Sweden for example, which is
generally a ‘high trust’ country in this respect, to continue to
maintain this trust and extend it in the face of new e-Research
possibilities that are being developed, takes much effort [4].
While it is therefore possible to build information systems that
inspire trust because of high levels of perceived security, that trust
can be easily destroyed by the most minor of breaches. Trust
between individual scientists is equally hard to maintain since it
relies mainly on interpersonal characteristics. The challenge for
e-Research, then, is to understand which elements of the research
process are most reliant on trust, and to ensure that trust is not
undermined by the technologies and processes expected of
contributors.
Another concern that has been expressed by e-Research projects
pertains to the economic constraints academic researchers face
when compared to industry players. NCeSS nodes are generally
small demonstrator projects with little or no support for the
eventual development of mature research tools with the extensive
user support that would be required if usage were to become
widespread. There is a feeling among some in the e-Research
community that the most likely outcome of many of these
academic demonstrators will be that industry players will see that

some of them are viable approaches to a problem, and the industry
developers will then create a package which will trickle back
down to the research community in several years’ time [12].
There is already some evidence for this: recent speculation in
Wired Magazine’s blog reports rumours that Google is developing
a project (code named Palimpset) to host open-source science data
in a tool that will include commenting and annotating features
[16]. Google’s resources are far more extensive than those of
academic projects; whether this project develops into something
more substantial remains to be seen, but it could become a major
player in academic research if the success of Google Scholar is
any indication. Should well-funded industry players decide to
move into the e-Research arena in a serious way, the entire
landscape of e-Research may be transformed.
While many other constraints have limited the early uptake of eResearch, these few examples should give an idea of the types of
issues we have identified and the potential for transformation in
science if these constraints can be overcome. We next turn to
several enablers for e-Research.

2.3.3. Enablers for e-Research
Funding shifts
As indicated in the introduction to this paper, shifts in funding in
the U.K., the U.S. and elsewhere are major drivers behind the
push to e-Research. The shifts at NSF towards transformative
research and the growth in the cyberinfrastructure funding
program attract new proposals. Likewise, programs in the U.K.
such as NCeSS encourage researchers to focus their attention on
developing tools and methods that enable e-Research. If these
and other programs in the U.S., the U.K., and elsewhere continue
to push new funds to e-Research development, the predictions of
the funders that e-Research will become a central focus of science
becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy, and the likelihood of
transformations in the practice of science become much more
likely.
New scientific questions
The ability to potentially answer previously unanswerable
scientific questions may be the most important driver behind the
push to e-Research. This is particularly true in certain scientific
fields where access to massive datasets may be the only way to
answer particular scientific questions. In biomedical genetics
research, for instance, very few of the disorders for which
scientists are trying to identify a genetic basis are triggered by a
single gene waiting to be discovered. Instead, many disorders are
suspected to be triggered by complex multiple gene interactions,
and may also be influenced by interactions between genes and an
individual’s environment. As such, many genetic studies discuss
measuring genetic risk for developing a particular disorder, rather
than discovering a gene responsible for the disorder. Because this
is much more complex than identifying a gene in the population,
genetics researchers are finding that they must rely on ever-larger
datasets if they are to have any hope of discovering the genetic
alleles that place subjects at risk for disease. One way the
scientists are doing this by contributing their collections of subject
data and DNA to larger collections, such as the GAIN example
described above. By increasing the number of DNA samples
available at the same time as increasing the amount of data
available from each sample, genetics researchers hope to find
better indicators of genetic risk in the populations they study.

Another type of research that can only really be done
collaboratively is astronomy. Astronomers have long shared
resources such as telescopes and sky data. There are currently
several international projects designed to create virtual
observatories in the U.K. (AstroGrid), the U.S. (NASA’s National
VO), Europe (Euro-VO), and elsewhere. These projects have
been built to enable astronomers to work with data that is stored
distributed across the Grid and analysed using parallel processing
techniques. The AstroGrid project, for instance, can find, process,
and analyse data from a given patch of sky that has been collected
from any instrument to which the project has access to the data on
the grid. Only the small portions of the data that are the result of
calculations need to be transferred back the astronomer, rather
than requiring him or her to download a large dataset and work
with the data natively. As these tools become more widely used,
astronomers are able to spend less time working with data and
more time doing analytic science.
A final example of how these collaborative resources can
transform practice in a scientific field comes from the field of
oceanography. Lamb [15] has described how oceanographers are
now able to use remote sensing to transform the practice of eventdriven science. The traditional means of collecting oceanographic
data was to send ships out to sea and wait for the types of events
the scientists needed data on to occur. In recent years, however,
oceanographers have been building extensive networks of remote
sensing devices located throughout the oceans. Now, the
scientists can monitor the readings from their offices. Also, if an
interesting event begins about which they would like to collect
additional information on-site, they can be notified of this by the
remote sensors and then dispatch a ship to sail to the location of
interest. This represents an enormous savings in time and money
for the oceanographers, and also allows them to collect much
more data than before.
If the necessity of harnessing massive resources is a major enabler
for e-Research, this may offer a clue to the relatively slow uptake
of the collaborative and Grid-based elements of e-Research
among social scientists. Social scientists have traditionally been
trained as primarily autonomous researchers, working
individually or on small teams. The datasets generated are often
small and easily managed and analyzed using desktop computing
applications. Unlike running complex astronomical calculations,
even the largest social surveys rarely tax the processing
capabilities of SPSS or SAS on the desktop. For many social
scientists, the Grid doesn’t appear to offer compellingly attractive
applications at this time. Even for social scientists using
quantitative statistics or large-scale Social Network Analysis
(SNA), their computational requirements do not generally
approach those of scientists modelling complex biological,
physical or astronomical systems. That may change if some sort
of “killer app” is developed, but even so, there will be disciplinary
resistance to a change in the normal practices of science.

2.4. Future work
Future work on the OeSS project will move beyond monitoring
how various e-Research projects negotiate the constraints with
which they are faced -- to include identifying more of the ways in
which e-Research realizes the promise of transformation for
research, and with what consequences. This will be done through
additional case studies, and through additional expansion to a
consideration of more international cases, including examination
of how national research policies influence the uptake of eResearch techniques.

3. DISCUSSION
While many transformations have taken place in early e-Research
projects, a more wide-spread transformation of research practice
has remained elusive.
The projects have undergone
transformation, some notions about the possibility of e-Research
have been transformed, and certain scientific fields have seen
significant transformations in the way that they work and the
types of scientific questions they are able to ask. For many
scientists, social scientists and other academic researchers, eResearch is still not central to their work.
One of the challenges in understanding the nature of how eResearch is developing is that many of the projects developing eResearch tools have, until fairly recently, been primarily
developing tools that had not yet been released or tested widely in
real-world settings. As the efforts have matured, however, it has
become feasible to study these projects and to begin developing
an understanding of the social shaping that has occurred, and the
social, organizational, ethical and legal issues that are associated
with the projects. For each of the topics discussed in this paper,
the examples are often of projects that have advanced far enough
beyond their early stages to have created tools that are being used
by scientists. In this way, we are able to examine transformations
in tools, projects, scientific practice, and the formulation of
scientific questions. In some areas, early results indicate that
many transformations have taken place. For instance, at the
micro-level, many of the projects have experienced significant
transformation from their earliest roots as the initial ideas were
shaped by experience. As Schroeder & Fry have observed, “the
obstacles to the effectiveness of e-science are not so much
technical, as social” [24]. These social barriers are part of the
feedback loops that operate as the projects transform over time.
At other levels, however, there is currently less evidence that eResearch tools and e-Infrastructures have yet transformed either
meso-level practices of ordinary science or macro-level questions
that science is able to imagine and study. One question that
remains is whether this lack of fundamental transformation is a
temporary problem which will disappear as tools become better
developed and more widely used, or whether there are larger
issues that make it unlikely that science will be transformed so
much as reinforced by e-Research tools. If the former is true, then
it becomes just a matter of time and effort to reach the critical
mass required for transformation. And if mass adoption of these
tools seems an ambitious target, it can be noted that research
technologies have, in the past, been drivers for scientific changes
because the tools have migrated across different applications and
disciplinary domains [23]. If the latter is true, however, then one
needs to examine the underlying forces that operate to resist

changes in scientific practice and instead co-opt new tools to the
service of existing patterns. Indeed, it is very difficult to predict
in advance whether new scientific tools are likelier to support
normal science or to enable paradigm shifts, to use the language
of Kuhn [14].
We are very early in the story of e-Research. Some elements such
as electronically accessible journals are well developed, while
others such as Grid-enabled applications for social scientists are
in their infancy. The extent to which any of these will prove to be
transformative remains to be seen, but we would predict that most
will instead tend to reinforce existing patterns of scholarship,
particularly in the short term. We will continue to research these
issues, however, and eagerly await new developments in eResearch as the projects enabling e-Research mature.

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been supported by NCeSS and the ESRC
through grant RES-149-25-1022. The authors wish to thank
NCeSS and ESRC for their continuing support, and also wish to
acknowledge the contributions of all the people who have worked
on the OeSS project, including Annamaria Carusi, Paul David,
Matthijs den Besten, Jenny Fry, Marina Jirotka, and other
colleagues at the University of Oxford and elsewhere.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Copyright Law of the United States of America. 1976. 17
USC 105.
[2] Copyright, Designs and Patents Act (Great Britain). 1988.
Chapter 48 (X) (163).
[3] Allen, R. 2004. NCeSS: the National Centre for e-Social
Science. Available online:
http://www.grids.ac.uk/twiki/bin/view/ELearning/NCeSS.
[4] Axelsson, A.-S. and Schroeder, R. 2007. Making it Open and
Keeping it Safe: e-Enabled Datasharing in Sweden and
Related Issues. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on e-Social Science, (Ann Arbor, Michigan,
USA, October 7-9, 2007).
[5] Borgman, C. 2007. Scholarship in the Digital Age. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
[6] Brower, R.S. 2000. On improving qualitative methods in
public administration research. Admin. Soc. 32 (4), 363-397.
[7] Carusi, A. and Jirotka, M. 2007. From data archive to ethical
labrynth. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual International eSocial Science Conference, (Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA,
October 7-9, 2007).
[8] Carusi, A., Jirotka, M. and Parker, M. 2006. Trust and Ethics
in e-Science Agenda Setting Workshop Report, Oxford eResearch Centre, Oxford. Available online:
http://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/events/details.cfm?id=22.
[9] David, P., den Besten, M. and Schroeder, R. 2006. How Open
is e-Science? In Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International
Conference on e-Science and Grid Computing, (Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, December 4-6, 2006).
[10] Dutton, W.H. 2007. Reconfiguring Access: A Framework. In
Proceedings of the World Wide Science Conference,
(Oxford, UK, May 31-June 1, 2007).
[11] Fry, J., den Besten, M. and Schroeder, R. n.d. Open Science
in e-Science: Contingency or Policy? J. Doc.

[12] Halfpenny, P. Comments at NCeSS Showcase, Manchester,
2008.
[13] Hudson-Smith, A. 2007. Digital Urban Blog. Available
online: http://digitalurban.blogspot.com/2007/08/ordnancesurvey-and-google-statements.html.
[14] Kuhn, T. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
[15] Lamb, R. Keynote speech at IFIP-TC9 World Conference on
Human Choice and Computers, Maribor, Slovenia, 2006.
[16] Madrigal, A. 2008. Wired Science Blog: Google to Host
Terabytes of Open-Source Science Data. Available online:
http://blog.wired.com/wiredscience/2008/01/google-toprovi.html.
[17] Meyer, E.T. 2008, Forthcoming. Moving from small science
to big science: Social and organizational impediments to
large scale data sharing. In Jankowski, N. ed. E-Research:
Transformation in Scholarly Practice, Routledge, New York.
[18] Meyer, E.T. and Kling, R. 2002. Leveling the playing field,
or expanding the bleachers? Socio-Technical Interaction
Networks and arXiv.org (Center for Social Informatics
Working Paper Series WP-02-10) Center for Social
Informatics Working Paper Series, Center for Social
Informatics, Bloomington, IN. Available online:
http://www.slis.indiana.edu/CSI/WP/WP02-10B.html.
[19] National Centre for e-Social Science. 2007. NCeSS webpage,
Manchester, UK. Available online: http://www.ncess.ac.uk/.
[20] National Science Foundation. 2007. Proposal and Award
Policies and Procedures Guide NSF 08-1, January 2008
(Document number nsf081), NSF.gov, Arlington, Virgina.
Available online:
http://www.nsf.gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=pa
pp.
[21] Ordnance Survey. 2008. Overview. Available online:
http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/aboutus/yourinf
orights/.
[22] Schroeder, R. 2007. e-Research Infrastructures and Open
Science: Towards a New System of Knowledge Production?
Prometheus 25 (1), 1-17.
[23] Schroeder, R. 2008. e-Sciences as Research Technologies:
Reconfiguring Disciplines, Globalizing Knowledge. Soc. Sc.
Inform. 47 (2).
[24] Schroeder, R. and Fry, J. 2007. Social Science Approaches to
e-Science: Framing an Agenda. J. Comput.-Mediat. Comm.
12 (2), Article 11.
[25] Willinsky, J. 2005. The Access Principle. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

