The Social (Tagging) Act of Reading



Cheryl Knott Malone

UA SIRLS

1515 East First Street

Tucson, AZ 85719

1-520-621-3565

ckmalone@u.arizona.edu



ABSTRACT

On Flickr, a Web-based service for managing and sharing digital images,
reading and tagging come together in ways that reveal how people -- as
individuals organizing their own photographs as well as making them
available for discovery by others -- think about reading when they
attempt to depict it in images and in words. In this pilot study of the
tags assigned to a sample of 100 photographs tagged with the terms book
and reading, only 80 of the 561 total tags were used more than once. The
broad range of unique tags suggests an idiosyncratic approach to
labeling that makes it difficult to draw conclusions about images of
reading. Consequently, additional searches were conducted on Flickr and
the results are reported and interpreted. The paper concludes with a
discussion of proposed follow-up research.

Topics

	Cultural information systems

	Information organization

	

Keywords

reading, books, social tagging, Flickr, photographs

INTRODUCTION

Mitchell Stephens in The Rise of the Image, the Fall of the Word 
describes three places -- a physician's waiting room, a child's bedroom,
and a passenger jet -- and asks "What's missing from these pictures?"
His answer: "Reading is now missing from countless scenes it once
dominated: at kitchen tables, on buses and trains, in beds at night, on
couches, even in some classrooms."  

, p. 8] Reading of literature in particular is less present in American
lives, according to a National Endowment for the Arts survey, which in
2004 identified "an overall decline of 10 percentage points in literary
readers from 1982 to 2002, representing a loss of 20 million potential
readers." [6] At the same time, scholars of print culture have produced
quantities of studies 

of reading, both current and historical. The work on current reading
practices often uses ethnographic methods to observe and interview
readers while the historical studies draw on the customary sources of
historians, archival and published texts, to reconstruct readers and
their experiences.  Their work documents the political, social,
individual, and cultural functions, uses, and meanings of reading in
diverse circumstances and locales.

Reading would at first glance seem to have nothing to do with
collaborative or distributed tagging of information resources,
especially images. Both are of interest to researchers and teachers of
library and information science (LIS), albeit to different and probably
not overlapping communities of interest, despite the fact that neither
reading nor tagging is considered core to LIS paradigms or to the LIS
curriculum [4], [9]. Print culture theorists understand reading as both
a solitary and a social act. Similarly, social tagging of information
resources has both individual and social aspects. One place where
reading and tagging come together is Flickr, a Web-based service for
managing and sharing digital images. Images tagged "reading" constitute
a new body of documentation for print culture scholars, who typically
have relied on the word to study the word, but they also offer a body of
data for LIS researchers interested in understanding the phenomenon of
collaborative indexing and what it can tell us about amateur or what
Beghtol [1] has called "naïve" information resource description and
organization. Corinne Jorgensen [4] has pointed out that there are now
three ways to provide intellectual access to images: human-assigned
controlled vocabulary terms, computer-generated indexing, and social (or
distributed or collaborative) tagging. She suggests that social tagging
may help reduce the "semantic gap" between human indexing with its
interest in contextual meaning and automated indexing with its focus on
describing the content and characteristics of the object represented in
an image.

On Flickr, reading and tagging come together in ways that reveal how
people -- as individuals organizing their own photographs as well as
making them available for discovery by others -- think about reading
when they attempt to depict it in images and in words. How people
conceptualize and represent reading in the early 21st century matters to
students of print culture interested in the continuing and changing
activities and behaviors associated with literacy and to students of
information interested in the continuing and changing activities and
behaviors associated with resource description for organization and
retrieval. Consequently, this paper marks the beginning of a research
project designed to uncover and analyze modern-day graphic and textual
representations of reading in everyday life. The preliminary work
reported here focuses on identifying what is depicted images labeled
with the tags books and reading. This work will serve as a foundation
for further research into the relationship between reading and tagging
as social acts but also as an intellectual interaction characteristic of
life in the Information Age.  

METHODS

Approximately 55 million photographs are on Flickr. [3] The number
fluctuates as new photos are uploaded and as existing ones are removed.
A simple keyword search of the full text of Flickr for reading yields
more than 700,000 results (after deleting those where the keywords
pennsylvania, penn, and pa also occur in an attempt to eliminate
photographs of the city of Reading). When the search is limited to tags
only, the result is almost 109,000. This pilot study used two methods to
reduce the number of results for the purposes of this report. The search
query included the words reading and book limited to tags only, bringing
the total results to 11,213. A random sample of 100 of these results was
selected for the study. The 100 photographs depicted a range of
compositions including individuals and groups handling books, still-life
compositions involving books with other objects such as coffee mugs and
eyeglasses, shots of individual books both open and closed, and stacks
or piles or shelves of books. The researcher viewed each of the 100
images and their tags and recorded and tabulated the tags. 

To address Mitchell Stephens's assertion about where reading occurs,
additional searches were conducted using keywords such as train, bus,
and airplane combined with book and limited to tags only.  The point is
not to prove that books still have a place in the Information Age as
evidenced by their robust representation on a photo-sharing site, but to
explore what constitutes "reading" to the collective mind of Flickr
image taggers and to elicit questions for further investigation.

FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS

Although this study is limited to images tagged with both reading and
book, many other keywords related to the topic are assigned as tags on
Flickr. Table 1 lists some of them and the number of records with those
tags (as of 01/24/08), ranked by most to least common. The singular form
book is the most commonly used tag, but it is not clear that every image
tagged with the term is using that keyword to mean the printed codex.
What is clear is that some photographs tagged with the term book do not
depict a book at all but merely evoke the idea of a book, such as the
image of a  young man looking down [2] or of a solitary bookmark [5].
Not surprisingly, more specific tags, such as novel and hardcover are
used less frequently than broader tags. 

 

Table   SEQ Table \* ARABIC  1 . Reading-related keywords as Flickr tags

Keyword	Occurrences

Book	199,416

Books	137,162

Reading	108,553

Read	13,755

Novel	5,842

Reader	3,806

Paperback	2,999

Novels	1,713

Readers	1,597

Hardcover	814

Mybook	747

Reads	654

Mybooks	644

Hardback	479

Softcover	406

Chapbook	233

Chapbooks	22



Although the 100 photos included in this study are not necessarily
tagged with the keywords shown in Table 1, they nevertheless are useful
because they were tagged with two of the most popular ones: book and
reading. The number of unique tags beyond book and reading assigned to
these 100 photographs totaled 559. Of the 561 total tags assigned to the
100 photographs, only 80 were used more than once, as shown in Table 2. 

The terms have not been grouped into categories, but some ways to do
that are obvious. For example, it would make sense to combine the terms
me, self, and self-portrait (which is a already a combination of
self-portrait and selfportrait) into a single group 

Table 2. Additional tags for photos tagged book and reading

Tag	Occurrences

Read	9

Books	7

Me	7

self-portrait	6

Coffee	5

Girl	5

Library	5

People	5

Art	4

Café	4

Christmas	4

Glasses	4

portrait	4

Woman	4

2005	3

American tour	3

Author	3

baby 	3

beautiful	3

Bed	3

Blue	3

bookstore 	3

Bouchercon 2007	3

Country	3

crime writer	3

France	3

Glacier	3

Home	3

literature	3

Michael Jecks	3

novelist	3

Paris	3

Red	3

San Francisco	3

School	3

Signing	3

View	3

Writing	3

365 days	2

365days	2

Architecture	2

Beach	2

Black	2

Bookmark	2

Bw	2

bwPingu	2

California	2

Cat	2

Days	2

Display	2

Dog	2

Doll	2

Eslite	2

Eslitebooks	2

Explore	2

Family	2

Felt	2

Holiday	2

Illustration	2

India	2

lady 	2

Lesson	2

Librarian	2

Libro	2

Livro	2

Man	2

Mom	2

Nikon	2

Peets	2

Reader	2

Self	2

Shoes	2

Sitting	2

Statue	2

Story	2

Street	2

Student	2

Studying	2

Sunset	2

Taipei	2

totaling 15 occurrences in the 561 tags used in the 100 photos. But the
tag me, tied for second place with 7 occurrences, is interesting in and
of itself.   

It’s commonplace for library and information science (LIS)
practitioners and researchers to assert that tags are akin to subject
headings and indexing terms, but the tag me arose out of social tagging
and not out of formal, expert controlled-vocabulary construction. For
those of us with an LIS background, the tag me seems superfluous at best
and downright nonsensical given its ambiguity and its seeming lack of
utility for information retrieval. And, yet, it has its uses, however
unexpected.  One Flickr user has written: “The ‘me’ tag is easily
my favourite tag on Flickr, it shows the wide variety of different folks
who post to Flickr, a wide variety of ages and genders, appearances and
attitudes.” [8] Tagging a photo me may serve as the photographer’s
way to take credit for their work without having to reveal their real
name or other personal information.

Table 2 does not indicate what’s most striking about the ways in which
images related to reading are tagged because it does not list the 479
tags assigned to only one of the 100 photos in the sample set.  These
unique tags range alphabetically from A train to zig. Many of them are
the first names of the individuals captured in the photographs. Others
are the titles and authors of the books depicted.  As with the tags in
Table 2, such as library and studying, some of these single-use terms
seem highly correlated to the reading of books.  For example, the terms
include literary festival and author event.  Other terms, such as the
active sailing and the passive sleeping, seem incompatible with the act
of reading. 

The tags for the sample of 100 images do not quite address Mitchell
Stephens’s assertion that it is rare to find people reading in public
or private spaces. The sample set is small relative to the total number
of images on Flickr. And people do not tag in a systematic manner
requiring them to make sure every object shown in a photograph has a
corresponding tag. But a search in all of Flickr combining the tag book
with other tags representing a variety of settings did turn up some
results worth considering, as seen in Table 3. 

Beach emerged as the most frequent setting of the setting-related tags
searched. It may be that people take books to the beach in greater
numbers than to Starbucks. Perhaps they take newspapers to Starbucks
instead. It could also be that people take books and digital cameras on
the relatively rare and relaxed days when they visit the beach more
often than they take both to Starbucks when they stop in on their way to
work. In other words, each row in the table can only suggest some of the
contexts in which books can be found. The table as a whole, however,
provides us with a sense that some books coincide with some people’s
eating, drinking, loafing, and traveling. 

And with their shooting and sharing of photographs. 

Table 3. Photos with book tag and a contextual tag

Tags	Occurrences

beach	1,436

table	1,096

coffee	992

bed	929

park	788

train	594

 kitchen	502

café	495

lunch	494

hotel	452

couch	439

bedroom	357

office	338

Starbucks	201

dinner	200

bus	176

pool	173

breakfast	170

metro	160

subway	159

airplane	158

waiting	117

coffeeshop	66



FURTHER RESEARCH

This preliminary study cannot offer definitive conclusions, but it can
serve as the foundation for further research, especially because it can
suggest additional questions to ask and methods to use.

Here are some research questions that have occurred to me and that I
plan to pursue as a result of this early work.

What demographics are represented in photos depicting people and books?
What proportion show different age groups, genders, ethnicities, and
nationalities? What are the methodological issues involved in trying to
interpret demographics from images when the accompanying tags do not
provide any demographic indications?

Which books are shown in photographs tagged with terms related to books
and reading? Which authors are represented, which specific book titles,
and which categories of books are shown and in what proportion? What
impact does a media event such as the release of a Harry Potter book
have on the number and type of photos published?

How do the titles and captions and comments supplement or subvert the
tags assigned to photos? How does the photostream and/or themed set in
which the photo appears alter the viewer’s understanding of the photo?


To what extent are photos of reading staged versus candid? To what
extent is the book a prop? What is the function of the book as
prop—for creating a particular self-image or for product (or author or
bookstore or library) promotion or to evoke the centuries-old symbol of
literacy or revolution or erudition? 

The last set of questions will require surveying and/or interviewing
photographers.  The remaining questions can be answered largely through
the use of good data gathering and analytic methods.

Flickr is a popular and successful social networking site and its
features serve its users well. But the researcher needs different kinds
of features and functions. The large number of unique tags assigned to
photos, the lack of a highly developed search engine with full Boolean
operations and truncation devices, and the absence of a controlled
vocabulary of indexing terms hamper the researcher’s ability to
retrieve a reliable and accurate set of results depicting reading.
Consequently, the data-gathering and analysis methods used in subsequent
work on this topic should include researcher-generated indexing terms
for each image being studied. This approach would introduce much-needed
consistency; for example, a photo of someone reading in the aisles at
Borders and another of a reader sitting in a chair at Barnes & Noble
would both be assigned a controlled-vocabulary term such as
“bookstore.” This approach would also allow not only for greater
consistency but also for comprehensiveness, at least for the
researcher’s interests. For instance, a photo of a person sitting on
the grass in a city park would probably never be tagged “public” but
the researcher interested in making a distinction between reading in
public and reading in private would find such a tag useful. 

Finally, the researcher’s work should be grounded not only in the
literature of social tagging but in the theory of the social uses of
photography and in work on the intersection of print and digital
culture.

CONCLUSION

The practices of sharing digital images and providing collaborative
tagging to describe images have created an intriguing body of work that
can be mined for information related to many topics, not least of which
is the topic of books and reading in the era of digital information. But
neither images nor their labels offer unambiguous evidence for the
persistence of the printed codex, its relative presence in people’s
lives, or the uses to which it is put. A preliminary look at a selection
of digital photos tagged book and reading suggests that, with carefully
crafted research methods, both image and word can be studied together to
help us understand individual and social uses of reading, or perhaps
more accurately, individual and social uses of representations of
reading.  

  

REFERENCES

Beghtol, C. 2003. Classification for information retrieval and
classification for knowledge discovery: Relationships between
"professional" and "naïve" classifications. Knowl. Organ. 30, 64-73. 

Finraz. 2007. DSC_8547.jpg. DOI=
http://www.Flickr.com/photos/finraz/1815754754

Flickr. Creative Commons. DOI=(http://www.Flickr.com/creativecommons/)

Jörgensen, C. 2007. Image access, the semantic gap, and social tagging
as a paradigm shift. In Lussky, Joan, Ed., Proceedings 18th Workshop of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology Special
Interest Group in Classification Research, Milwaukee, WI.
DOI=http://dlist.sir.arizona.edu/2064/. 

MoonlitBeadery. 2008. Cobalt & Cranberry Baking Bookmark.
DOI=http://www.flickr.com/photos/moonlitbeadery/2209086765/.

National Endowment for the Arts. 8 July 2004. Literary reading in
dramatic decline, according to National Endowment for the Arts Survey.
DOI=http://www.nea.gov/news/news04/ReadingAtRisk.html.

Stephens, M. (1998). The Rise of the Image, the Fall of the Word. Oxford
University Press.

striatic. 2004. Tagography ~ case studies. FlickrCentral/Discuss. DOI=
http://www.Flickr.com/groups/central/discuss/2730/ .

Wiegand, W.A. 1997. Out of sight, out of mind: Why don't we have any
schools of library and reading studies? J. Educ. Libr. Inf. Sci. 38,
314-326.

 PAGE   

