Understanding del.icio.us Tag Choice Using Simulations
Rick Wash

Emilee Rader

School of Information
University of Michigan

School of Information
University of Michigan

rwash@umich.edu

ejrader@umich.edu

ABSTRACT

group information management, because it does not require that users try to conform to a controlled vocabulary
or organization scheme.

Understanding how users choose tags can help researchers
better understand how tagging systems can be used and
how to design better tagging systems for the future.
We developed a simulation of del.icio.us, a popular social bookmarking tool, that allowed us to simulate users
choosing tags using one of four possible strategies for tag
choice found in the literature. We then compared the
resulting tag choices with empirical data retrieved from
del.icio.us to determine which tag choice strategies would
result in choices most similar to those seen in the real
world. We were able to rule out three of the strategies
as unlikely to be the primary means by which tags are
chosen on del.icio.us.

In this paper, we focus on the social bookmarking website del.icio.us as a case study of a collaborative tagging system supporting both personal and shared information management. del.icio.us is an online application
that allows users to save and tag their own web bookmarks so they are accessible from any networked computer. del.icio.us has recently received attention in the
research literature as the canonical example of a collaborative tagging system for information management [7, 9].
We are studying how users choose tags, and hope to apply this knowledge to improve information management
interfaces.

Topics

Wash and Rader [12] argue that the usefulness of
del.icio.us depends critically on how users choose tags.
Golder and Huberman [7] argue that users’ tag choices
are not random; instead, consensus seems to emerge for
which tags best represent a given web page. They show
that web pages bookmarked in del.icio.us demonstrate a
stable frequency distribution following a power-law pattern in which the same few tags are chosen by many
users, while most other tags are selected by only a few
users. The “long tail” of the power-law distribution includes hundreds more tags used by only one or two people.
Golder and Huberman speculate that this pattern might
be due to users imitating each others’ tag choices; in other
words, when a user bookmarks a web page in del.icio.us,
their tag choices might be influenced by tags that had
been previously applied to that web page by other users.

Information Organization

Keywords
tagging, del.icio.us, social bookmarking, simulation

1.

INTRODUCTION

User-contributed metadata, also known as tagging, is increasingly receiving attention as a tool for digital information management. Collaborative tagging systems such
as del.icio.us and citeulike.org publicly expose individual users’ associations between content items and tags,
thereby providing visibility into words others have used
to tag similar items. Grudin [8] suggests that collaborative tagging can be a low-effort solution for shared or

However, it is reasonable to assume that there might be
other sources of influence on users’ tag choices having
to do with personal information management goals. For
example, a user interested in del.icio.us only for organizing and re-finding their own bookmarks might strive for
consistency within their own “controlled vocabulary”, to
maintain a shorter list of tags [12]. Or, users might desire
to expend as little effort as possible when choosing tags,

Copyright and Disclaimer Information
The copyright of this document remains with the authors and/or their
institutions. By submitting their papers to the iSchools Conference 2008
web site, the authors hereby grant a license for the iSchools to post and
disseminate their papers on this site and on a CD. Contact the authors
directly for any use outside of downloading and referencing this paper.
Neither the iSchools nor any of its associated universities endorse this
work. The authors are solely responsible for their paper’s content. Our
thanks to the Association for Computing Machinery for permission to
adapt and use their template for the iSchools 2008 Conference.

1

and simply select the tags the system recommends when
they create a new bookmark.

produced by our four simulated strategies, and the actual frequency distribution of tags on a random sample of
websites bookmarked in del.icio.us, henceforth called the
empirical distribution. In this way, we hoped to identify
which strategies were capable of producing distributions
similar to the empirical distribution and which were not.
Strategies producing similar distributions can be considered plausible, in the sense that they could possibly have
given rise to the empirical distribution. Strategies producing distributions that are dramatically different from
the empirical distribution can be ruled out as unlikely to
have been used widely on del.icio.us

The research literature contains multiple competing explanations for the patterns of tags that appear on
del.icio.us. All of these explanations initially seem like
reasonable explanations of the way that del.icio.us users
choose tags. But they cannot all be right simultaneously.
It would be nice to actually have collections of real people
specifically use one or more of the strategies suggested by
the literature on delicious. We could then see if those
tag choices resulted in patterns of tags similar to those
found on del.icio.us. Unfortunately, this technique would
be prohibitively costly. Instead, we developed a computational simulation of users doing this. This simulation
allows us to control exactly what strategy the simulated
users used to choose tags. Such a simulation cannot tell
us which strategy the real users of del.icio.us used; it can
only tell us which strategies are likely to result in patterns
of tags that are similar to those observed on del.icio.us.
In other words, the simulation cannot confidently identify how users chose tags, but it can be used to rule out
explanations that are unlikely to generate the observed
patterns of tags.

We began by downloading and parsing the entire bookmark and tag histories for approximately 12,000 different
websites in del.icio.us. We generated the tag frequency
distribution for a randomly selected subset of those websites, and compared it against seven known distribution
types (powerlaw, log-normal, geometric, etc.), to determine the best fit. Knowing the family of distributions to
which the del.icio.us tag frequency distribution belongs
allowed us to statistically determine whether the distributions produced by our simulation were of the same type.
Next, we developed a simulation of users’ tag choices,
details of which will be provided later in the paper. The
simulation was instructed to follow each one of the four
strategies listed above, in turn. For each strategy, 30
different websites were simulated; for each website users’
simulated tag selections were recorded and statistically
compared with the empirical distribution.

We ran the simulation for four different tag selection
strategies and compared the results with the tag frequency distribution observed on del.icio.us. We then used
statistical techniques to determine whether the simulated
tag selection strategies were consistent with the empirically observed data. We tested the following strategies:

We were primarily interested in looking at two specific
patterns of tags. First, as many people have pointed out,
the tags associated with a specific website in del.icio.us
tend to follow a powerlaw distribution [7]. Tag choice
strategies that do not result in a powerlaw-shaped distribution of tags are unlikely to have been used by the users
Imitation: Users might imitate previous users’ tag of del.icio.us. This powerlaw distribution seems to be an
choices. This was described by Golder and Huber- important property of tags on del.icio.us [7]. Second, we
man [7]
have looked at the average inter-user agreement between
users who bookmark the same website. Furnas et al. [6]
User-based: Users might favor tags that they had used have found that typically two individuals will choose the
previously. This was described by Wash and Rader same word to describe an object less than 20% of the time.
[12]
On del.icio.us, this number is closer to 15% of the time.
Tag choice strategies that result in many users agreeing
Recommended: Users might prefer to click on the tags
with each other are also unlikely to have been used on
that are programatically recommended by del.icio.us.
del.icio.us. Inter-user agreement is a metric that is sufficiently different than the powerlaw distribution of tags,
The latter three are the same strategies studied in a large- and is a good complementary metric for characterizing a
set of tag choices.
scale statistical analysis by Rader and Wash [11].
Zipf ’s Law: Zipf’s law states that word frequency in
most written works follows a powerlaw distribution.
Therefore, del.icio.us users might naturally choose
their words from a powerlaw distribution.[10]

In this paper, we first report the results from our analysis
of the empirical data downloaded from del.icio.us. The

The goal of the research described in this paper was to detect similarities between the tag frequency distributions
2

results from this analysis were used in the simulation to
make the simulation more realistic. We then describe the
simulation in detail, and report the results of the analysis
comparing the empirical and simulated data. We conclude with a discussion of the implications of this work.

normal distribution better than the other 6 distributions
we tested. The fitted distributions had a mean log value
of 0.82 ± 0.45 and a standard deviation log value of 0.73 ±
0.19. On average a user of del.icio.us will choose 2.51 tags
(with a standard deviation of 1.42) when bookmarking a
website.

2.

We used this data to estimate two distributions: 1) The
distribution of tag frequency — for a given website bookmarked, how frequently was each tag applied to it? and
2) The number of tags chosen by a user — when a user
is bookmarking a website, how many tags will he or she
apply?

Inter-user Agreement It has long been accepted that
people use language imprecisely, and meaning is negotiated on the fly during conversation [3]. This imprecision
is evident not only in communication, but also when people are asked to create keywords for recipes and names for
common editing operations [6] and when user-generated
index terms are compared with Library of Congress subject headings [5]. In fact, the probability that two people
will generate the same label for the same object, called
the “vocabulary problem,” is widely held to be less than
20% [6, 2]. When a user wants to take advantage of the
collective properties of social bookmarking by browsing
or searching on tags, the vocabulary problem becomes
apparent. If users are unlikely to choose the same tags to
represent the same topics, such diversity would decrease
search precision. When a given tag is applied to bookmarks in an inconsistent manner by many users, more
variability exists in the content returned when a user
searches with that tag. The desired bookmark may be
returned, but there would be too much other “noise” in
the results for it to be noticed.

We fit the data to multiple families of distributions and
see which distribution fits “best.” “Best” here is a statistical determination [4]. We fit the data from each site to
seven different discrete probability distribution families
(discrete powerlaw, negative binomial, binomial, discrete
lognormal, discrete exponential, poisson, and geometric),
estimating parameters with maximum likelihood estimation. We then used a non-nested Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test to conduct pairwise comparisons between these distributions.

To measure the extent of the vocabulary problem on
del.icio.us, we calculated the average inter-user agreement
for a sample of 200 users from each of the 30 websites that
we had full user data for. On average, users who bookmarked these websites chose the same tag for the website
only 14% ± 5% of the time. This percentage is low, indicating a fair bit of disagreement between users, though
it is higher than the 8% reported by [6] for their textediting operations dataset. Figure 1 shows a histogram
of the inter-user agreement values for the 30 websites.

ANALYSIS OF EMPIRICAL DATA

Over two weeks in January 2007, we downloaded the entire bookmark and tag history for approximately 20,000
different webpages in del.icio.us. The webpages were chosen by periodically sampling the “recently posted” and
“popular” del.icio.us pages. We randomly chose 30 webpages from our sample that had been bookmarked by at
least 100 users. Then, in June 2007 we downloaded the
complete public bookmark histories for all of the approximately 12,000 users who had ever bookmarked any of
these 30 webpages. In other words, our dataset contains
the complete tag histories for 30 webpages bookmarked
in del.icio.us, as well as tag histories for all users who ever
bookmarked any of those 30 webpages.

The discrete powerlaw distribution fit the empirically observed tag distributions better than any of the other 6
distributions we tested. The fitted distribution had an
average exponent (α) of 1.92 ± 0.40. This is a rather low
exponent for a powerlaw distribution, and indicates that
the “long tail” of tags is very long and heavy. This low exponent also has another important implication. Newman
[10] explains that powerlaw distributions with an exponent less than 2 have an infinite (or undefined) mean.
Therefore, estimates of a “mean” or average tag are undefined, and any inferential statistics based on the mean
of the tag distribution cannot be used.

3.

SIMULATING TAG CHOICES

To compare the four tag choice strategies, we simulated
120 websites for each of the four strategies. Each of
the 120 websites was paired with one of 30 real websites randomly selected from our sample downloaded from
del.icio.us, and the number of users for each simulated
website was chosen to match the real website.
Each simulated website was assigned to have the same
number of users as its matched real website, and each
simulated user was matched with a real user who bookmarked that website. In essence, we are simulating what
would happen if the same set of users bookmarked the real

The number of tags chosen by a user fit a discrete log
3

Inter−user agreement for del.icio.us data

average 2.5. This was done because any single user’s tags
cannot repeat, and this lack of repetition (i.e., sampling
without replacement) forces the user to choose more tags
in the ‘tail’ of the distribution than they would if tag
choices were truly independent. If I choose three tags,
they cannot all be the most popular tag. Through experimentation, we found that having users choose tags from
a powerlaw distribution with an alpha about 2.5 tends
to yield a site-wide powerlaw distribution for tags that
approximately match the observed distributions.

40

Percent of Total

30

20

Each number from this distribution is then mapped onto
a specific tag, according to its rank in the frequency distribution. The tags from the matched real site are ordered
from most-frequently used to least-frequently used, with
ties being broken randomly. A 1 from the random number
generator is then mapped onto the most-frequently-used
tag, 2 onto the second most frequently used tag, and so
on. Any numbers larger than the number of tags on the
matched site are left as numbers.

10

0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Inter−user Agreement

Figure 1: Histogram of the Average Inter-user Agreement For each user, the specific tags that they choose will depend on which of the four strategies they are assigned to
for 30 websites bookmarked on del.icio.us
use. The only difference between these four strategies is
in specific tag choice; all other decisions (number of users,
website, but chose their tags according to one of our four number of tags per user, etc.) are identical.
hypothesized strategies (and bookmarked it in a random
order). To simulate a user choosing tags for that website,
two choices have to be made. First, the simulator chooses
how many tags that user will apply to the website. Second, the simulator chooses which specific tags would be
applied.

Zipf ’s Law The simplest strategy is to follow Zipf’s
law, and choose tags directly from the base powerlaw
distribution. The simulator continually chooses random
numbers from the base powerlaw distribution until it has
the required number of unique numbers. These numbers
are then mapped onto tags as described above.

As we found above for del.icio.us, the number of tags applied by a user tends to be distributed according to a discrete log normal distribution. For each simulated website,
the simulation randomly chose a set of parameters (mean
log, and standard deviation of the log) for a discrete log
normal probability distribution to match the distribution
of parameter values we found empirically on del.icio.us.
Once a set of parameters was chosen, this specifies an exact probability distribution. For each simulated user, the
simulator would then choose a random number from this
probability distribution, and that number would be the
number of tags that simulated user would choose.

Imitation For users to imitate previous users’ tag
choices, it is necessary for those previous users to exist. The first few users who bookmark a website will
have no one to imitate. To handle this, the first 20 users
will draw as described above for Zipf’s law and serve as
‘seeders.’ All users after the first 20 who use this strategy will choose a tag from the current empirical distribution of tags for his simulated website. This means that
if there are two tags, ‘A’ and ‘B’, and ‘A’ has been used
twice previously and ‘B’ only once, then tag ‘A’ is chosen
with probability 23 and tag ‘B’ is chosen with probability
1
3 . However, to ensure growth of the vocabulary beyond
that
used by the initial 20 seeders, each tag choice has a
We found that that tags applied to a given website on
10%
probability
of choosing a new, previously unused tag.
del.icio.us are distributed according to a discrete powerThis
probability
was chosen to match the average empirlaw distribution. In a manner similar to that used for the
ically
observed
probability
from the del.icio.us data. The
number of tags, the simulator chooses a parameter (alaverage
website
in
our
sample
from del.icio.us has a new
pha) for a discrete powerlaw distribution. This distributag
probability
of
10.5%
±
8.3%.
tion then will serve as the base distribution that specific
tags are drawn from. The alpha parameter is chosen not
to directly match the value observed above (1.92), but to
4

User-based Not all users will want to apply tags that
they have used before. As such, when simulating the Table 1: 1) Average difference between simulated poweruser-based strategy, the simulated users had a 50/50 law exponent and real powerlaw exponent, and 2) Averchance of choosing tags according to Zipf’s law, and of age Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness-of-fit statistic
Delta
KS
choosing tags they had used before. When choosing tags
Real
World
X
0.07
they had used before, the simulator computes the overlap
Zipf’s Law
0.23 0.08
(set intersection) between the tags the user had ever used
User
0.19 0.08
and the tags that were ever applied to the matched site.
Imitation
0.32 0.14
It then randomly chooses among the tags in this overlap
Recommended
0.34 0.22
set. If that is not enough tags, then additional tags are
chosen randomly from the base powerlaw distribution.
Recommended Del.icio.us does not make their algorithm for choosing which tags to recommend public. As
such, we could not directly simulate users choosing from
del.icio.us’s recommended tags. We did, however, create a
simple approximation. We proposed that the tagging system could simply recommend the N most popular tags for
that website. Then users could randomly choose among
those N tags.

the probability of tag ‘B’. This is a very high information
requirement for users – they must know the exact proportions of existing tags to choose appropriately. Del.icio.us
does not make this information easily available; however
we assume this knowledge for our simulations with the
imitate strategy.

To compare the four tag choice strategies, we simulated
120 “websites” for each of the four strategies. Each of the
If del.icio.us’s recommendation algorithm is solely based 120 websites was paired with one of 30 real websites, and
on the frequency of applying tags to that website, then the number of users was chosen to match the real website.
this approximation is a reasonable proxy for del.icio.us’s Figure 2 shows the tag distribution (on a log-log plot) for
recommendation algorithm. If the real algorithm includes all four of the strategies on one of these websites. Also
other data (such as the tags a user has used, or the popu- on the graph is the empirically observed tag distribution
larity of tags across the site) then this simulated strategy from the paired website. The non-powerlaw nature of the
will not be a good proxy for the del.icio.us algorithm.
recommended strategy stands out, with a small number
of roughly equally likely tags (the recommended tags) and
To simulate users choosing tags with the recommended then a sharp drop in probability for the other tags.
strategy, we first create 20 ‘seeders’ in the same way we
did for the imitation strategy simulation. All of the re- For each simulated website, we fit the simulated tag distrimaining users then are simulated to have been presented bution to a discrete powerlaw distribution. We used this
with N = 5 ‘recommended’ tags (the 5 most popular tags fit for two comparisons. First we computed the difference
at that point) and then randomly choose between these between the powerlaw exponent in the simulated distriburecommended tags. If they need to apply more than 5 tion and the exponent in the real distribution. The first
tags, then the remaining tags are chosen randomly from column (Delta) of Table 1 shows the average difference in
the base powerlaw distribution.
exponents. Second, we conducted a Kolmogorov-Smirnov
goodness-of-fit test to see how well the simulated distribution fit a powerlaw. A KS statistic of 0 means that the
4. SIMULATION RESULTS
distribution is identical to a powerlaw, and higher numOne of the benefits of simulation is that the development bers indicate greater deviation from a powerlaw. The
process forced us to be very explicit about what informa- second column (KS) of Table 1 indicates the average KS
tion users would need to follow a hypothesized strategy. statistic for each of the four strategies. As a comparison,
Golder and Huberman [7] suggest that the powerlaw dis- the empirical data from del.icio.us fits a powerlaw with an
tribution of tags for a given website could arise from users average KS statistic of 0.067. Neither the imitation nor
intentionally imitating previous users tag choices. They recommended strategies fit a powerlaw very well. The
cite the networks literature [1, 10] for evidence that pow- distributions from Zipf ’s Law and User-based strateerlaw distributions can arise from such path-dependent gies fit as well as the real data from del.icio.us.
choices. When trying to replicate these decisions for our
simulation, we found that this only works if a user chooses Inter-user Agreement In addition to fitting the tag
tags from the empirical distribution at the time of deci- distribution, we also calculated the average inter-user
sion. This means if tag ‘A’ has been used twice as much agreement between users of each of the 480 simulated
as tag ‘B’, then tag ‘A’ need to be chosen with twice websites. Figure 3 shows the distribution of average inter5

Real World
Zipf's Law
Recommended
Imitate
User−based

10^2.5

Frequency

10^2.0

10^1.5

10^1.0

10^0.5

10^0.0

10^0.0

10^0.5

10^1.0

10^1.5

10^2.0

Tag Index
Figure 2: Tag distributions for four simulated runs, matched with a real empirically-observed tag distribution (on a
log-log scale)

6

Inter−user Agreement by Strategy
0.1

Zipf's Law

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

User−based

40

30

20

Percent of Total

10

0

Imitate

Recommended

40

30

20

10

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Inter−user Agreement

Figure 3: Histograms of the average inter-user agreement for the simulated websites. There is one histogram for each
tagging strategy used. Notice that two strategies (Recommended and Zipf ’s Law) have a higher mean than the
other two.

7

the recommended tags our simulations suggest that they
do so more intentionally than ‘just clicking a few’ of the
recommended tags.

Table 2: Average Inter-user Agreement for each of the
four simulated tagging strategies
Mean IUA
σ2
Real World
0.144 0.051
Zipf’s Law
0.373 0.074
User
0.182 0.052
Imitation
0.184 0.056
Recommended
0.317 0.088

The hypothesis that users choose tags by imitating other
users, with previous tag choices influencing the current
choice, is also unlikely to be what del.icio.us users are really doing. The information requirements that would be
necessary for users to choose tags this way are large; users
need to know both which words were previously applied as
tags and how frequently they were applied to use this hyuser agreements for each of the four strategies. Table 2 pothesized strategy. But even if users could easily get the
provides the mean inter-user agreement value for each of proper information, the resulting tag distributions from
the four strategies (along with their standard deviation), the simulations are skewed and have a shorter tail than
and a comparison point with the real-world data from the tag distributions we observed on del.icio.us. This sugdel.icio.us. The mean inter-user agreement for the user- gests that users are driven by something more than just
based strategy and the imitation strategy are statisti- imitating past users.
cally indistinguishable. All other pairwise comparisons
between inter-user agreement values are statistically sig- We also believe that the Zipf’s law hypothesis is unlikely,
nificant at the 10% level.1
as it results in dramatically higher inter-user agreement
than we observed on del.icio.us. This high inter-user
Our simulations resulted in users agreeing with each other agreement is because every user who bookmarks a website
much more often when using the Zipf ’s law strategy or with this strategy is choosing tags from the same powerthe recommended strategy. This indicates to us that law distribution — the tag that is most likely to be chosen
these strategies are unlikely to have been used by the is the same for all users. This suggests that users are not
users who bookmarked these 30 websites on del.icio.us. all choosing tags from the same distribution – at the very
However, the inter-user agreement tests cannot rule out least they have individualized distributions of words to
either the user-based strategy or the imitation strategy choose from.
for tag choices, because they resulted in similar levels of
inter-user agreement.
We cannot rule out the user-based hypothesis based on
our simulations. We found that when our simulated users
choose tags using the user-based strategy, the resulting
5. DISCUSSION
tag distribution is as close to a powerlaw distribution
We compared four possible strategies that users might use as our empirical data from del.icio.us, and the inter-user
to choose tags on del.icio.us. Our simulations indicate agreement is approximately similar to the level of interthat choosing the recommended tags would result in a user agreement in our sample of del.icio.us. Choosing
skewed distribution that fits a powerlaw distribution less tags from the user’s set of tags results in a similar level
than the empirically observed distribution. Choosing the of inter-user agreement and a powerlaw tag distribution.
recommended tags will also cause higher levels of inter- This suggests that each user has his or her own way of
user agreement than are empirically observed. Both of choosing tags, and that individual and idiosyncratic way
these findings are a direct result of the fact that in our of choosing tags is a major influence on tag choices. Howsimulation users choose uniformly at random among the ever, this research is not able to distinguish what some
recommended tags. They do this because they have no of the different idiosyncratic strategies are. It is clear,
better way of determining which recommended tags are though, that future systems that support collaborative
appropriate. On del.icio.us, it is unclear how users choose tagging will need to be sufficiently flexible to allow each
among the tags that del.icio.us recommends. If they just user to choose their own way of determining which tags
‘click a couple’ of tags, then del.icio.us would end up with to use.
skewed tag distributions and high inter-user agreement.
Since we did not find that on del.icio.us, if users do utilize Since this is a simulation study, we can only compare
aggregate measures of tag choices like the shape of the
1 Comparisons were done with a series of t.tests, and used a Bonferroni correction to adjust the p-values for multiple tests. All re- resulting tag distribution. This study cannot look at indimaining comparisions were statistically significant at the 0.1% level vidual tag decisions to determine which strategy was used
except the two: the comparison between the real world data and the for that specific tag choice, as the same strategy might not
user-based strategy, and the comparison between the real world
be used across all users, or even all the tag choices of an
data and the imitation strategy.
8

individual user. In another part of this project, we [11]
use a logistic regression to attempt to determine which of
these four strategies was in use for individual tagging decisions on del.icio.us. Fortunately, the results from that
work corroborate the results here.

[6] G. Furnas, T. Landauer, L. Gomez, and S. Dumais.
Statistical semantics: Analysis of the potential performance of key-word information systems. The Bell
System Technical Journal, 62(6):1753–1806, 1983.
[7] S. Golder and B. A. Huberman. Usage patterns of
collaborative tagging systems. Journal of Information Science, 32(2):198–208, 2006.

REFERENCES

[8] J. Grudin. Enterprise knowledge management and
emerging technologies. In HICSS ’06, 4-7 January
2006.

[1] A.-L. Barabasi and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling
in random networks. Science, 286, 1999.
[2] M. J. Bates. Indexing and access for digital libraries
and the internet: Human, database, and domain
factors. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(13):1185–1205, 1998. BatesJASIS1998.

[9] H. Halpin, V. Robu, and H. Shepherd. The complex
dynamics of collaborative tagging. In WWW ’07,
2007.
[10] M. E. J. Newman. Power laws, pareto distributions
and zipf’s law. Contemporary Physics, 46:323–351,
2005.

[3] H. Clark. Using Language. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, England, UK, 1996.

[11] E. Rader and R. Wash. Collaborative tagging and information management: Influences on tag choices in
del.icio.us. Working Paper, University of Michigan.,
September 2007.

[4] A. Clauset, C. R. Shalizi, and M. E. J. Newman.
Power-law distributions in empirical data. Preprint,
Jun 2007.

[5] L. Y. Collantes. Degree of agreement in naming objects and concepts for information retrieval. Jour- [12] R. Wash and E. Rader. Public bookmarks and private benefits: An analysis of incentives in social comnal of the American Society for Information Science,
puting. In ASIS&T Annual Meeting, 2007.
46(2):116–132, 1995.

9

