Understanding Information Ethics and Policy:
Integrating Ethical Reflection
and Critical Thinking into Policy Development
Toni Carbo
Professor, School of Information
Sciences and
Graduate School of Public and
International Affairs
University of Pittsburgh, 602 IS Building,
SIS, 135 N. Bellefield
Pittsburgh PA 15260 USA
412 624-9310

tcarbo@sis.pitt.edu
ABSTRACT
“By Toni Carbo
University of Pittsburgh

organizations. Then, building on policy
frameworks and several models for ethical reflection
and critical thinking, the paper will describe briefly a
case-based learning approach with a model for critical
thinking for a proposed undergraduate course on
Information Ethics and Policy.

CATEGORIES
DESCRIPTORS

AND

SUBJECT

GENERAL TERMS
KEYWORDS

Abstract: The development and implementation of
information policies must begin with an understanding
of underlying values, such from different cultural
perspectives and points of view. As Capurro reminds
us: “As a self-referential process ethics is an unending
quest on explicit and implicit use of the moral code,
that is to say of respect or disrespect, with regard to
individual and social communication. . . .There is,
indeed, no unbiased ethical observer. (Capurro et al.
2007, 21). In her work on ethical warrant, Berghtol
has noted the importance of understanding context
(Beghtol 2002). Her concept of “cultural hospitality”
provides a theoretical framework for the ethical
warrant of knowledge representation and organization
systems, and it helps in representing new knowledge
and organizations systems and for revising existing
systems, and the diverse cultures to which each
individual belongs. Using these two foundations, this
paper provides an overview of some of the critical
information ethics issues challenging policy makers in
government and in

Information Ethics,
Information Policy

Undergraduate

Education,

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background and Context
Ethics as reflection on morality is widely accepted
among philosopher beginning with Aristotle, the
founder of ethics as an academic discipline. As Rafael
Capurro, who heads the International Center for
Information Ethics (ICIE), reminds us:
As a self-referential process ethics
is an unending quest on explicit
and implicit use of the
moral code, that is to say of
respect or disrespect, with
regard to individual and
social communication. In
other words, ethics observes
the ways we communicate with
each other as moral persons
and the ways this moral
identify is understood.
There is, indeed, no unbiased
ethical observer.[1]

In the rapidly changing environments in which
information professionals work and in which iSchool

educators teach, ethical issues are increasingly being
raised, demanding attention and efforts toward
resolution. Of particular interest for iSchools and the
information field are those related to information
throughout its life-cycle. Originally called the ethics of
information in society, this topic has more commonly
been referred to as Information Ethics (IE) [2].
Beginning in 1997, conferences on the Ethics of
Electronic Information in the 21st Century were held at
the University Memphis [3]. The subject of IE has also
gained international interest as demonstrated by recent
activities, starting with the first UNESCO Conference
of InfoEthics in 1997 [4]. In 2003, an invitational
conference was held in Karlsruhe, Germany under the
leadership of the ICIE with support from the
Volkswagen-Stiftung [5]; in 2004. The World Summit
on the Information Society (WSIS 2003) developed
the “Declaration of Principles: Building the
Information Society: A Global Challenge in the New
Millennium,”[6] and in February 2007, the First
African Conference on Information Ethics was held in
South Africa (First African Conference on Information
Ethics) [7]. Building on the 2007 conference, in
August 2008 a UNESCO and the South African
government sponsored training workshop on IE and EGovernment in Sub-Saharan Africa twill be held in
South Africa.
Of course, many professional associations in the
information field have had codes of ethics for years,
and the Association for Library and Information
Science Education (ALISE) recently established a
taskforce to develop a code of ethics for ALISE, with
a report due at its annual conference in January 2009.
The topic of Information Ethics has been addressed in
the literature, with an annual review of the literature
on the topic first appearing in the Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology in 1992 [8]. Over
the past nearly 20 years, several iSchools have
incorporated information ethics into their curricula,
both as stand-alone courses and as part of other
courses, many of which are required core courses.

2. IE EDUCATION AT PITT’S
iSchool
In 1989 the School introduced a lecture series on “The
Ethics of Information in Society” to help in shaping
the Information Ethics course that was introduced the
following year.
The course seeks to provide a background to applied
ethics as a prelude to learning the skills of ethical
decision-making and, then, to applying those skills to
the real and current challenges of the Information

Profession.
The scope of the coursework and
discussions includes decision-making and challenges
related to information sources and services in all
formats and media; to the Internet and other digital
sources (cyber ethics); and to information-related
topics in management. The objectives of the course,
described as what students will be expected to have at
the completion of the course, are:
Developed a better understanding
of themselves (in the ongoing
endeavor to “Know thyself”);
Learned how to identify an issue,
reflect on it (which is ethics) and
make a decision that is moral;
Engaged in reflective thinking and
careful choice of words, which
result in civil discourse;
Developed an understanding of the
art and science of applied ethics as
related to the main challenges
currently confronting the
Information Profession.
The course is not a philosophy or religion course, but
instead concentrates on the application of ethical
reasoning to the Information Profession, with its
many, diverse specializations. It is divided into three
main sections: an introduction to applied ethics, the
necessary steps for facing up to and resolving a moral
dilemma and making a decision, and ethical issues in
our field. The approach combines “knowing how”
with “knowing why” and concentrates on the many
questions to be asked in resolving complex issues,
beginning with the individual. It is about each of us as
an individual even though it is often easier to think of
someone else’s ethics, and also relates to interactions
with other components of life (e.g., the environment,
animals, etc.). The importance of the relationship
between one individual and another and the need to
learn to understand that each of us is a human worthy
of respect – that we are fundamentally the same – is
stressed. The initial assignment is for students to read
and reflect on the U.N. Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and Martin Luther King’s “I Have a
Dream” speech and to write a short paper on the
Fundamental Moral Experience. They then identify a
personal problem or issue (whether related to personal
or professional life) and work throughout the course
towards solution of the problem.
For the course, the definition of ethics used is:
Ethics is the art and science
that seeks to bring sensitivity

and method to the discernment of
moral values. (Stephen Almagno
and Toni Carbo)
Students read a series of books and articles, which
change over time and are drawn from a number of
disciplines, including philosophy, library and
information science, business, and many others. The
readings usually include at least two books, such as
Stephen Carter’s Integrity and the Dalai Lama’s Ethics
for the New Millennium, as well as articles from the
Journal of Information Ethics, the Harvard Business
Review and numerous other journals in the library and
information field and from other disciplines.

3. MODELS FOR ETHICAL
DECISION-MAKING
3.1 Context
Several readings and references to websites (including
ICIE’s website) have been included throughout the
course to provide the context for ethical reflection and
decision-making, in particular to emphasize the
importance of different perspectives from cultural,
social, and individual viewpoints. This broader
understanding is essential to any course, especially
this course. The course is taught in English to
English-speaking students and is thus limited in the
readings that are used, although students are
encouraged to bring in examples from their own
readings in different languages and from experience in
their own countries and cultures. I have consistently
emphasized my own limitations and encouraged others
to broaden the views of everyone in the course.
One very helpful, if complex, source for
understanding context is Clare Beghtol’s work on
ethical warrant [9]. Dr. Beghtol, who is on the faculty
of the University of Toronto, Faculty of Information
Studies, draws upon her extensive research to address
problems of creating ethically based, globally
accessible, and culturally acceptable knowledge
representation and organization systems and
foundation principles for the ethical treatment of
different cultures. Basing her work on the U.N.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, she presents
the concept of “cultural hospitality,” to act as a
theoretical framework for the ethical warrant of
knowledge representation and organization systems.
She concludes that the concept of cultural hospitality
is promising for assessing the ethical foundations of
systems for representing new knowledge and
organizations systems and for revising existing

systems. Reminding us that each individual belongs
to a number of different cultures at different levels
(e.g., living in one country, speaking different
languages, adhering to policies and practices of
different religions and/or political parties, belonging to
different social organizations, etc.), she notes that
individuals may and do legitimately disagree. She
also argues that the boundaries among cultures can
themselves be fuzzy and create tensions within an
individual. In her discussions of the relationships of
any particular culture to its information needs and
systems and noting differences among oral and written
cultures, she raises questions concerning what kinds of
information people need; what they do with it; the
extent to which they value it; and whether they choose
to perpetuate the information. Her thoughtful, if
somewhat densely packed, paper raises several
questions, such as whether principles of cultural
hospitality can be used to develop culture-neutral
systems and theories, which deserve much more
discussion. Her paper continues to stimulate thinking
and discussion by students.

3.2 Models and Frameworks
3.2. 1The Wheel
Over the fifteen years of teaching the course, we have
used a series of models to assist students with ethical
reflection and decision-making. Initially, Prof.
Almagno used the model of a wheel with four groups
of questions in the center hub: 1.) What; 2.) Why?
How? Who? When? Where? 3) Foreseeable effects?
And 4.) Viable alternatives. The spokes of the wheel
are: Creative/imagination, reason/analysis, principles,
affectivity, individual experience, group experience,
authority, comedy, and tragedy. The questions in the
hub provided questions for gathering information and
to help in revealing other questions to be asked to
determine reality. They also provide a reminder that
ethical thinking requires dialogue, even if only with
one’s self. The spokes serve as evaluation resources
through which moral consciousness and awareness can
unfold, and they provide a systematic process to
address the concerns about how to evaluate each step
in making a decision. While some students found the
wheel helpful in assisting their decision-making
process, many found the steps suggested by the spokes
to be somewhat confusing and to overlap.

3.2. Mason et al. Checklist
One example used is that proposed by Mason et al. in
Ethics of Information Management [10]. They remind
the readers that ethical dialogues are dynamic and
nonlinear and suggest a “checklist” of six
considerations to be taken into account when resolving
an ethical issue [11]. These steps are:
1)
2)

3)
4)
5)
6)

What are the facts?
What ethical principles,
standards, or norms should be
applied?
Who should decide?
Who should benefit from the
decision?
How should the decision be
made?
What steps should be taken to
prevent this issue from
occurring again?

Step one relates to morally relevant considerations and
requires both determining pertinent information
(understanding the life cycles involved and
identification of key decision-making processes) and
identifying all the key stakeholders, their values,
motivation, and physical history). This step
establishes ‘what is.’ The second step concentrates on
‘what ought to be,” and identifies ethical
considerations to be applied. The third step seeks to
identify who should take necessary actions, how to
ensure that all stakeholders are included, and
legitimacy and right to make decisions, as well as the
ability to affect a resolution. Step four addresses the
various benefits of all the stakeholders and how to
balance these, including both short-term and long-run
considerations. Step five addresses the method of
decision-making, which must be and perceived to be
fair and ethical. The final step recognizes that each
decision becomes a precedent and seeks to decide
what procedures should be used in the future and what
decision will be best for the future. Of course, this
process must be used within the specific context of the
stakeholders making the decision and within the wider
societal context.
This framework has been somewhat useful in the
course, but many students have found that it does not
provide sufficient guidance for them. A key problem
is that is starts with gathering facts before reflecting
on the questions related to fully understanding what
are the initial questions to be asked to help identify
exactly what problems and issues need to be

addressed. Also, little guidance is provided to address
other questions, especially the second one.

3.3 Woodward Framework
The late Diana Woodward, formerly on the faculty of
Drexel University, presents a framework for deciding
issues in ethics [12]. She discusses advantages and
disadvantages of consequentiality and deontology as
bases for ethical reasoning in general, and intellectual
freedom in general, concluding that a deontological
defense of intellectual freedom is “safer” than one on
consequential grounds. The article, while helpful for
introducing some of the philosophical foundations and
theoretical bases for ethical reasoning, does not
provide a useful framework for addressing many
practical, “real-world” issues.

3.4 O’Boyle
O’Boyle [13] concentrates on the use of the Code of
Ethics from the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM), described as deontological because of its
enumeration of rights (what is owed by others) and
duties (what is owed to others), within a general
ethical decision-making process to determine an
action. Providing a sound discussion of earlier
writings on the ACM Code, he places the Code within
a general ethical decision-making process, he
differentiates between to human faculties: intellect and
will. O’Boyle builds on work of Rest and Kohlberg
and identifies a six-stage process: 1) Moral perception
and personal knowledge of the moral good
(recognition that the problem exists); 2) Moral
discernment and personal ability to think logically
(stating the problem clearly); 3) Moral resolution and
personal ability to think analytically (tackling the
complexities of the problem to arrive at an individual
position); 4) Moral assessment and personal ability to
assess one’s freedom (assessment, including being
aware of the double-edged sword of new
technologies); 5) Moral decision and personal
knowledge of one’s duties (decision, including
personal duty and obligations); and 6) Moral action
and personal willingness to follow one’s intellect (free
will used to take action). O’Boyle finds that the ACM
Code is helpful with the first three stages, but not with
the other three, and that training is needed to apply the
Code effectively. He raises two provocative
suggestions: that implementing the Code could be
advanced by 1) making an individual ethical audit part
of an employee’s performance review, and by 2)
hiring people who have some understanding and

training in ethical behavior. The students have found
it helpful in applying codes of ethics to actual
situations and problems, and they find the questions to
be provocative. Because the article concentrates
specifically on the ACM Code, the six-stage
framework also has limitations. Also, it does not
include extensive discussion of the various needs and
perspectives of the various stakeholders, nor does it
address many of the complex cultural issues.

3.4 Ottoson
One example from the corporate sector was Gerald
Ottoson [14], a retired industry executive, who is now
a consultant. Ottoson has conducted numerous ethics
seminars over the years for workers in corporations.
His approach is to spend a small amount of time on
fundamental ethical values (e.g., honesty, mercy,
justice, etc.) and to concentrate on models to examine
real cases. “A Suggested Pattern of Inquiry,” is
presented as a checklist in reviewing and evaluating
past actions. The model uses a series of questions: 1)
Who should make the decision (includes where the
legitimate power to make the decision lies, limits on
authority, obligation/responsibility, need for
knowledge—the essential facts, and
neutrality/objectivity); 2) Who are the stakeholders
(principle of regard for others); 3) What are the
alternatives (including competing claims,
costs/benefits, etc.); and 4) How should the decision
be reached (inclusion in the process, perception of
involvement, avoidance of paternalism). He notes that
decision-making is always a compromise; there is no
“perfect” solution; and that there will always be some
regrettable aspects of the ultimate decision. He also
realistically argues that the final decisions often leave
the decision maker feeling a bit uncomfortable. While
his framework is incomplete and open to many
different interpretations, the students find this
example, used in conjunction with others, to be helpful
because of its emphasis on the workplace and its
realistic questions.
Dr. Christine Altenburger, a retired faculty member
from the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of
Public and International Affairs, taught applied ethics
for many years. In her teaching, she developed a
series of principles and a framework (unpublished),
which she has given permission to use in our classes.
The basic principles she identifies, summarized from
those frequently found in the literature, are: 1) Do no
harm. Do good if possible. 2) Observe the cannons of
justice. Be fair. 3) Respect the rights, dignity, and

freedom of all individuals. She also presents a flow
diagram, beginning with gathering facts, leading to
analysis and judgment, and incorporating decision
loops to reconsider answers to questions.
These and numerous readings have been used
throughout our course, but none provided the kind of
framework or guide needed for our students as they
worked towards resolutions of their problems. One
very helpful resource I have used is The Thinker’s
Guide to Understanding the Foundations of Ethical
Reasoning Critical Thinking Concept and Tools by
Richard Paul and Linda Elder [15]. This brief Guide
provides a concise discussion of the importance of
critical thinking and the elements of thought, a
checklist for reasoning, and a series of questions using
these elements. It also summarizes problems of
egocentric thinking and introduces a concise and
straightforward introduction to the function of ethics,
expanding on the discussion of egocentric thought,
and addressing problems of “pseudo-ethics”. It
discusses the differences between ethics and: religion,
social conventions, sexual taboos, political ideology,
and the law. The authors also remind the readers of
why it is important to distinguish among questions of
ethics, social conventions, religion and law, and they
present a series of elements of ethical reasoning. They
propose an eight-step process to determine the logic of
an ethical question: 1) purpose (considering an
individual’s rights and needs as well as those of
others); 2) key ethical question(s); 3) information
needed to answer the question(s); 4) concepts and
principles to guide thinking; 5) main assumptions
used; 6) points of view of all stakeholders; 7) main
inferences/conclusions (what are the alternatives, are
all being considered, etc.); and 8) implications (for self
and others, including consequences, questions of
harm/good, etc.).
This framework has worked successfully for students
to address a wide range of questions and problems. I
have also used it effectively as part of a brief
introduction to Information Ethics is our required
introductory course for Library and Information
Science Students, “Understanding Information,” in
other classes, and in continuing education workshop.
In the introductory course, students worked in groups
of six to discuss the process they would use (walking
through the eight steps) to respond to one of several
hypothetical examples based on a real-world case. In
each case, the students indicated that the framework
encourages them to ask many questions and to
examine different perspectives and issues. They also
noted the usefulness of the framework in working

through individual problems. A significant flaw in the
framework is that it focuses on logic and does not
recognize the individual’s emotions and subjective
feelings. This leads to a discussion of the importance
of recognizing that no human is ever totally objective
and of learning one’s own biases, personal values, and
cultural perspectives. The Guide seems to be the best
tool in our courses to help students work through
ethical reflection towards making moral decisions,
because it focuses on steps in critical thinking and
encourages students to work through the steps, looping
back to earlier steps, in the process. The steps rely on
logic and objectivity and do not take into account the
fact that no human is ever completely objective. This
shortcoming can, of course, be addressed by the
teacher through readings and by raising questions in
the discussion. The guide also serves to help stimulate
discussion among students and encourage raising
questions about the many options to be considered
throughout the steps.

4. PROPOSED UNDERGRADUATE
COURSE
At this point, the undergraduate course is in the
earliest planning stages. Several challenges must be
addressed: 1) teaching undergraduates, rather than
graduate students, 2) making the course both attractive
and relevant for undergraduates, and 3) incorporating
appropriate technologies. Although I have had the
occasional undergraduate in my classes (usually from
our BSIS program or the Honors College, with one
student from the School of Engineering), I have not
taught undergraduates. While I have done some
research about differences in expectations, learning
styles, and experiences in the Social Web, I must
admit to some trepidation.
Recognizing that an increasing number of students in
my introductory courses enter directly from college
and knowing that students in this upper-level course
will be predominantly college seniors reduces this
concern to a great extent.
Building on the extensive use of case studies and
online discussions and group interaction in my
courses, I enrolled in a day-long workshop in casebased learning. This workshop was extremely helpful
and helped me determine that this was the approach to
use. I have decided to use cases based on three
primary areas: 1) intellectual property protection and
use (particularly downloading of music and videos); 2)
freedom of expression (e.g., restrictions on hate
speech at universities, content on Facebook, MySpace,

etc.); and 3) gaming. I am currently examining the
growing literature on these three areas, especially
existing case studies, to determine which readings and
examples to include. I plan to use fiction and nonfiction, if possible, getting the assistance of an
undergraduate to help identify pertinent literature.
Simulation models related specifically to Information
Ethics are starting to appear in the research literature.
At the ALISE 2008 conference, I learned of one being
developed by Ken Fleischmann at the University of
Maryland and his colleagues [16], and we have agreed
that we will collaborate. He will make available the
beta version when it becomes available from his
research project, which will probably not be for at
least two years , and I will provide ideas on content
and presentation. In addition, as part of a proposal I
am developing with colleagues in Information Science
and Telecommunications, we will identify ways our
two projects (if ours is funded) can share information
and learn from each other’s. Even if our proposal is
not selected to go forward as the single proposal from
the University, or if it is not funded, I plan to work
with these colleagues to develop and incorporate
simulations into the course.
This work is in the earliest stages, and I would
appreciate comments and suggestions for the proposed
course to help make it as good as it can be.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Capurro et al. 2007, 21
[2] Froehlich 1992 and 2004
[3] See, e.g., Mendina 2000, Rockenbach and
Mendina 2003.
[4] Info-Ethics: First International Congress on
Ethical,Legaland Societal Aspects ofDigital
Information.Sponsored by UNESCO. Monaco,
March 10-12, 1997. In: Carbo, T. (Ed.) The
International Information and Library Review,
29(2) and 29(3/4).
[5] International Center for Information Ethics
Symposium, Karlsruhe, Germany, 4-6 October
2004. IJIE: International Journal of Information
Ethics 2(11)http://container.zkm.de/ijie/n0002/ijie
[6] World Summit on the Information Society. Geneva
2003-Tusin 2005. Declaration of Principles. 12
December 2003. (WSIS-03/GENEVA/DOC/4-E)

[7] First African Information Ethics Conference:
Ethical Challenges in the Information Age,
Pretoria, South Africa. 5-7 February 2007. (2007)
Proceedings. International Review of Information
Ethics. number 7. http://www.i-r-i-e.net
[8] Froehlich, T. J. 1992. Ethical considerations of
information professionals. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 27, 291-324.
[9] Beghtol, Clare. 2002. A Proposed Ethical Warrant
for Global Knowledge Representation and
Organization Systems. Journal of Documentation.
58, no. 5 (2002), 507-532.
[10] Mason, Richard O., Florence M. Mason, and
Mary J. Culnan.1995. Ethics of Information
Management. Sage, Thousand Oaks, California.
1995. 85-107.
[11] Ibid., 103-104
[12] Woodward, Diana. A Framework for Deciding
Issues in Ethics. 1990. Library Trends. 39
(summer & Fall 1990). 8-17.

[13] O’Boyle, Edward J. 2002. An Ethical DecisionMaking Process for Computing Professionals.
Ethics and Information Technology. 4 (2002) 267277.
[14] Ottoson, Gerald H. A Model for Ethical
Decision-Making. 1988. Ethikos. July/August
1988. 8-11.
[15] Paul, R., and L. Elder. 2006. The Thinkers Guide
to Understanding the Foundations of Ethical
Reasoning. Dillon Beach: The Foundation for
Critical Thinking.
[16] Fleischmann, K. R., Robbins, R. W. Robbins, and
Wallace, W. A. Educational Simulation for
Information Ethics. Presentation at the Association
for Library and Information Science Education.
January, 2008. Philadelphia, PA.

Ethics, Information Technology and
Today’s Undergraduate Classroom
Paul Conway
University of Michigan
1085 S. University Ave.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
734-615-1419

pconway@umich.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper highlights interdisciplinary research grounding a
course that is one of the core requirements of a new
undergraduate informatics curriculum. Ethics and Information
Technology explores the ethical dilemmas that exist where human
beings, information objects, and information systems interact. The
course tests the notion that the most effective way to explore how
new technologies relate to integrity, truthfulness, trust, respect for
privacy and individuality is to become immersed in a
technological environment where unethical behavior as well as
ethical norms can be safely and confidentially tested, evaluated,
observed, and experienced. The paper will summarize an
emerging literature in three areas: (1) the theories of ethics and
information technology, (2) the characteristics of the “Net
Generation” regarding the use of new technologies, and (3) the
central role played by “trust” in assessing the ethical implications
of new technologies, including online multiplayer games, image
editing, collaborative authoring, and open source coding
conventions. The paper will then demonstrate how this literature
informs the design and implementation of the course.

Topics
Information policy, ethics and law

Keywords
Undergraduate education, Information ethics, Pedagogy

1. INTRODUCTION
A new course, Ethics and Information Technology, is a significant
contribution by the University of Michigan’s School of
Information to a new undergraduate concentration in Informatics.
The course is one of four required core courses for the newly
approved major, which itself represents a deep collaboration
among faculty across three University schools. The uniqueness of
the undertaking raises the stakes, challenging the faculty of each

school to define a rich field of study in ways that resonates
intellectually across the entire partnership. The nature of this
cross-campus collaboration influences the design of new courses,
as well as the approaches to undergraduate education. Ethics and
Information Technology tests the notion that the most effective
way to explore how emerging technologies relate to information
ethics is to immerse students in a technological environment
where unethical behavior as well as ethical norms can be safely
and confidentially tested, evaluated, observed, and experienced.
In this regard, the course exists at the intersection of technology,
ethics, and pedagogy. This paper frames the principal theoretical
issues that underlie the design of the course and outlines its most
salient pedagogical features.

2. CONTEXT
“Ethics” is variously defined [O.E.D.] as a branch of philosophy
concerned with evaluating human action, the study of individual
or group values, or a system of defining right and wrong
behaviors. When applied to the professions, ethics defines a code
of standards governing fair and responsible conduct with other
members of a profession and the general public. In association
with computer and information technologies, ethics concerns the
relationship of systems with the people who use them. [14] Most
recently, the concept of information ethics has extended
philosophical consideration well beyond the human behavior to
explore the ethical properties of information objects. [9]
The study of ethics within the context of information technology
is international in scope. The International Center for Information
Ethics (ICIE) identifies 104 individuals in over 90 organizations
around the world whose primary field of scholarship and teaching
is information ethics, with Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom,
and the United States having a particularly strong presence in the
field. [13] For the United States, ICIE’s selective database lists 32
individuals in 30 universities with a primary focus on information
ethics research. Nearly a dozen scholarly journals, continuing
sequences of international conferences, and highly touted
monographs and compendiums attest to the deepening scholarly
interest in ethics and emerging technologies.
The teaching of ethics has traditionally been an important element
of the university curriculum. The University of Michigan’s Ethics
in Public Life Initiative, for example, has compiled a current list
of over 300 regularly-scheduled courses that involve ethics as a
substantial component. [22] Academic disciplines offering these
courses range from the traditional and obvious (e.g., philosophy)
to the more subtle and nuanced (e.g., environmental studies).
Every professional school at Michigan offers at least one course

at the graduate level focused on either professional ethics or
ethics policies appropriate to the profession. Those professional
schools that offer undergraduate courses or degrees include, but
do not necessarily require the study of ethical issues to complete a
major.
Ethics in the iSchools, however, presents a paradox. Ethics is
simultaneously a core principle governing the formulation of their
teaching missions and a minor or peripheral area of research. On
the one hand, the websites for all of the 19 iSchools describe
ethics as one of their important areas of concern. Nearly all
iSchools offer specific graduate-level courses that include an
investigation of either professional ethics or ethics policy issues.
And yet, six of the 19 members of the consortium of iSchools
account for a total of only eight faculty in the ICIE database of
research specialists in information ethics. Although the ICIE
database does not reflect the efforts of faculty who primarily or
exclusively teach ethics, it is clear that research on ethics is not at
this point in time a central research or teaching strength of most
iSchools.

3. A FRAMEWORK
The undergraduate course Ethics and Information Technology
exists at the intersection of three distinctive concepts: (1) the
philosophy of ethics, (2) the social characteristics of emerging
information technologies, and (3) the learning styles of a
particular cohort of students. Although literature on the theoretical
foundation for each of these areas is vast, there is a particular

The McRobb framework and its supporting literature is oriented
toward the ethical issues involved in distance learning, drawing
for support on the literature of computer supported collaborative
learning. The conceptual model represented by the McRobb
illustration, however, provides a convenient mechanism for
highlighting how the issues that are at the heart of the Michigan
course overlap and intersect. The framework includes three
pressures that constrain the content of the three issue areas,
among them the expectations of a wider audience regarding the
evolving role of ethics education in the academy, the limitations
imposed by university technology systems, and perspectives of
various professional bodies or academic disciplines on the
appropriate approaches to ethics education. Each of these
constraining issues is at work in the design of a course that
purports to exist outside the boundaries of the existing curriculum.
Ethics and Information Technology is not only a new course but
one that straddles and attempts to incorporate the perspectives of
the three disciplines that are contributing to the new Informatics
curriculum.
The framework is most relevant in identifying three distinctive
intellectual spaces where conceptual overlap creates interesting
new perspectives. First, the boundary where the study of ethics
and the characteristics of emerging technology overlap, labeled in
the figure as “Computer Ethics,” provides a set of useful ethical
models that are the intellectual structure of course. Second, the
boundary where ethics and pedagogy overlap orients the course’s
interactive design and the flow of the individual course modules.
Third, the boundary where technology and pedagogy overlap
provides the rationale for an immersive technology environment
in which students and instructor model the challenges posed by a
suite of technologies.

4. ETHICS AND TECHNOLOGY
Scholarship on the relationships between information technology
and ethical beliefs and behaviors have been debated and refined
for the past fifty years. How this scholarship informs the teaching
of these relationships is less well understood.

Figure 1. The links between technology, pedagogy and ethics

absence of literature that addresses the theoretical foundations
challenges at the intersection. McRobb, Jefferies and Stahl [16]
propose a framework that describes research findings in the areas
where the concepts overlap and establishes a domain where the
concepts of ethics, technology, and pedagogy are most dynamic.
Figure 1 is the authors’ graphic illustration of their framework.

Terrell Bynum [1] credits the American philosopher/scientist
Howard Weiner (the founder of the science of cybernetics) with
foreseeing the enormous ethical and social impacts of information
technology and laying the groundwork for the study of computer
ethics. Writing in the 1950s, Wiener grounded his ethical theories
of computer technology in the view that human beings are
complex information feedback system that govern their
relationships with other humans and the world around them.
Drawing on Aristotle and flowing through Weiner’s systems
perspective, Bynum proposes that the purpose of human life is to
flourish as a person [2] and to do so through a diversity of
information processing activities. In this regard, the principal
value of information technology is to extend human potential by
reinforcing the principles of freedom, equality, and benevolence.
Weiner simultaneously defined the ethical underpinnings of
Vannevar Bush’s Memex and anticipated the collaborative social
technologies of Douglas Englebart. Bynum and others see the
culmination of Wiener’s vision of “flourishing ethics” in the
theoretical constructs of Luciano Floridi’s “Infosphere.” [8]
James Moor is a bridge from the discipline of computer ethics to
the broader world of information ethics. Moor [18] initially
defined computer ethics in terms of a policy vacuum that occurs

when “new technological capabilities provide new choices for
action in an environment where existing policies seem
inadequate.” Computer ethics includes consideration of both
personal and social policies for the ethical use of computer
technology. Writing twenty years later, following the explosion of
the World Wide Web and the emergence of widespread social
computing applications, Moor called for a more flexible and agile
approach to investigating the relationship of new technologies to
human ethical behavior.
Moor [19] establishes a three part progressive model of
technology development that relates the maturity of revolutionary
technology to increasing ethical complexity. According to his
model more people will be involved, more technology will be
used, and hence more policy vacuums and conceptual muddles
will arise as the revolution advances.” In the case of emergent
(immature or experimental) technologies, such as the socially
oriented tools and systems typified by the over-used moniker Web
2.0, Moor postulates his own “Law,” which states that “as
technological revolutions increase their social impact, ethical
problems increase,” because revolutionary technology provides
many new opportunities for action “for which well thought out
ethical policies will not have been developed.” Moor lays out
three approaches to study new technologies from an ethical
perspective, including investigating new technologies before they
have stabilized, using multi-disciplinary approaches to research,
and adopting sophisticated ethical analyses to avoid the tendency
to revert to simplistic cost/benefit analyses that translate ethical
choices into monetary terms. “We need to learn about the
technology as it is developing and to project and assess possible
consequences of its various applications.” The Michigan course
places students into a policy-weak environment populated by
technologies whose use and abuse are not fully understood.
An important open question at the intersection of ethics and
technology is whether the social dynamics of new technologies
are generating new ethical models of behavior. In addressing this
question, Himma [11] focuses on the role of ethics in informed
decision making. He reviews and ultimately dismisses claims that
computer ethics has a claim to theoretical uniqueness.
“Understanding computing technologies will help to produce
well-informed ethical views – regardless of how we characterize
those technologies.”
Rafael Capurro [4] adds another dimension by highlighting the
nature of the content that is embedded in or made accessible by
networked technologies. He argues for a holistic view of
information that is attentive to the mass transformation/transition
of content from analog to digital. “In this broader sense
information ethics deals with questions of digitalization, i.e., the
reconstruction of all possible phenomena in the world as digital
information and the problems caused by their exchange,
combination and utilization.” Capurro makes an essential
connection between communication technologies and the human
propensity to share and preserve. A basic moral principle of the
information environment, he claims, “is to share knowledge, or
the right to communicate in a digital environment which includes
the right to preserve what we communicate for future
generations.” Capurro reminds us that the appropriation of
modern information technology is not just a technical also but a
culturally-bounded endeavor.

Luciano Floridi [9] presents, perhaps, the most well developed
philosophical perspective on the ethical issues associated with
information and communication technologies. Floridi’s
“Infosphere” encompasses not only cyberspace but also off-line
and analog information spaces. Adopting an object-oriented
approach to the design of a new ethical model, Floridi defines
moral action as a “dynamic system” arising out of the interaction
of seven principal components: 1) the agent, 2) the patient, 3)
their interactions, 4) the agent’s general frame of information, 5)
the factual information concerning the situation that is at least
partly available to the agent, 6) the general environment in which
the agent and patient are located, and 7) the specific situation in
which the interaction occurs. Drawing deeply on environmental
physics, Floridi restates that the fundamental principles (or rules)
of this dynamic system are grounded in the notion of information
entropy – that is the destruction, pollution and depletion of
information objects – ought not to be caused, ought to be
prevented, ought to be removed, and ought to be protected,
extended, improved, enriched and enhanced. [7] Information
ecology as a parallel. Floridi’s model and the norms it proposes
structure the flow of the Michigan course.
The real question for the intersection of ethics and technology is
the extent to which new technologies and the ways that people use
them foster new rules of ethical behavior (perhaps culturally
determined) or whether long standing principles are transferred to
new technological contexts. The pedagogical focus of the course
is designed in part to explore this issue dynamically and
interactively.

5. NET GENERATION PEDAGOGY
A course that examines ethical issues associated with new
technologies must necessarily take account of the learning styles
and the general attitudes of the undergraduates who enroll. The
conceptual design of the course, as well as its intellectual flow of
the individual modules and use of technology tools in and outside
the classroom are in part predicated on the notion that today’s
generation of undergraduates is somehow different than previous
generations.
Allowing for fluidity in the boundary lines, a case can be made
that at any point in time, generational cohorts bound by shared
experiences and history exhibit behavioral and attitudinal
cohesion. Commentators have labeled the generation of students
born since 1981 (a somewhat arbitrary point in time) as the Net
Generation, in part because they have grown up with the
widespread availability of personal computers and the Internet.
Strauss and Howe [21] characterize the members of the Net
Generation as sheltered and protected but pressured to excel,
endowed with a strong sense of their own specialness ( indicated
by high self-esteem), confident, and optimistic. They may be
more team oriented than previous generations, more comfortable
than average with multi-tasking, and very literate in the realm of
digital and visual technologies. Gibbons [10] argues that the
affinity of today’s undergraduates for information technology
“translates into new and different expectation about how to
gather, work with, translate, and share information.”
The apparent naturalness with which undergraduates embrace
new technologies leads some commentators to see technological
determinism at work. Lippincott [15] argues that “digital natives”

have acquired styles of learning and modes of interpersonal
interaction as a direct result of the availability of network
technologies, suggesting that the implications of this fact extend
beyond the classroom to challenge and change the mission and
purposes of libraries and other information services. Nye [20] and
most scholars of the history of science and technology reject the
deterministic thesis, arguing instead that “people become
enmeshed in a web of technical choices made for them by their
ancestors,” helping to explain why people may seem trapped by
the choices others have made.
The design of the Michigan course rejects a deterministic view of
the technologies it utilizes but starts with the premise that there
are generational differences in the perspectives of students and
teachers. Such differences may be manifested genuinely in
varying comfort levels with new and emerging technologies. But
the course’s structure, flow, and assessment methodologies leave
open the question of whether Net Generation learners harbor a
distinctive ethical world view in the use of these technologies.

6. THE CENTRALITY OF TRUST
The McRobb et al. framework (Figure 1) places a question mark
at the center of its analytical framework where ethics, technology,
and pedagogy meet. In their review of the associated research
literature, the authors found that “there seems to be little interest
in the exploration of the intersection of those areas…What
appears to be lacking is a good overview of the relationships of
the different issues involved.” [16]
In adapting the McRobb framework, course designers used the
concept of “trust” as an organizing principle for the individual
modules. The O.E.D. defines trust as: “confidence in or reliance
on some quality or attribute of a person or thing, or the truth of a
statement.” In placing trust at the intersection of ethics,
information technology, and pedagogy, the Michigan course
opens students to an examination of trust from multiple
perspectives, for example trust in individual identity, trust of the
integrity of digital content, trust in the transparency of open
source code and the community of people who create it. As the
case studies in Hutchings [12] demonstrate, the notion of trust
also enters into the dynamic engagements between teacher and
student, as well as student to student interactions inside and
outside of class.
In terms of identity with the context of the course, Buchanan and
Ess [3] demonstrate that trust bears on the extent to which
behavior within a virtual environment is conditioned by
knowledge of the identity of the agents within the environment.
The creation, modification, and behaviors of avatars in an online
environment is a particularly apt example of identity trust.
Chesney [5] follows the same line of reasoning in examining the
trust metrics underlying such collaborative writing efforts as
Wikipedia.
In terms of content, trust is intimately related to the notion of
“integrity,” which Duranti [6] defines universally for textual
documents in terms of reliability and authenticity. “It is generally
accepted by all literate civilizations that documents are
trustworthy (that is, reliable) because of their completeness and
controlled procedure of creation, and which are guaranteed to be
intact and what they purport to be (that is, authentic) by
controlled procedures of transmission and preservation, can be

presumed to be truthful (that is genuine) as to their content.”
Mitchell [17] reaches a less technical but no less measurable
conclusion in reference to trust in visual content. “If an image
follows the conventions of photography and seems internally
coherent, if the visual evidence that it presents support the
caption, and if we can confirm that this visual evidence is
consistent with other things that we accept as knowledge within
the framework of the relevant discourse, then we feel justified in
the attitude that seeing is believing.”

7. DESIGNING A COURSE
As conceived at Michigan, Ethics and Information Technology is
one of four courses of a new undergraduate concentration in
Informatics. The multidisciplinary concentration is a collaborative
undertaking among faculty from the university’s Computer
Science & Engineering division within the College of
Engineering, the Department of Statistics within the College of
Literature, Science and the Arts (LSA), and the School of
Information. The undergraduate concentration is based in LSA
but draws on faculty from all three schools. Program development
is led by a steering committee of two senior faculty from each of
the participating schools. Ethics and Information Technology is
guided by the collaborative spirit of the faculty development
team, but is being designed and will be taught by a team of two
faculty, one from the College of Engineering and one from the
School of Information.
Ethics and Information Technology explores the ethical dilemmas
that exist where human beings, information objects, and
information systems interact. Modular in design, the course
introduces students to a variety of ethical models from historical
and cross-cultural perspectives and then explores the relevance of
these models to a variety of new and emerging technologies that
are inherently social in their construction and use. Initial
examples of issues that the course covers in discrete modules
include:


interpersonal engagement through online games and
virtual environments,



the integrity of digital content in a networked world,
and



tradeoffs between security and openness of code, data,
and information systems.

Students explore the technological underpinnings of associated
technology systems, experiment with individual and group
interaction with technologies, and examine the mechanics of
ethical and unethical behaviors.
The course has two major instructional objectives: (1) integrate
opportunities for direct hands-on technical experiences, in order
to enhance understanding of ethical challenges presented by new
information technologies, and (2) offer opportunities to
participate via in-class discussions, short posts submitted to an
online discussion board, and longer written assignments; in order
to encourage multimodal contributions by students. Associated
with the objective are three related learning outcomes: (1)
demonstrate knowledge of current theories in information ethics;
(2) apply ethics theories to interpret behavior when using a
variety of information technology tools; and (3) evaluate the
nature of ethical choices made by self and others when serving
various roles.

New information technologies raise knotty issues regarding
integrity, truthfulness, trust, respect for privacy and individuality,
as well as the variations in ethical behavior across gender, racial
and ethnic group, socioeconomic class, sexual orientation, and
global cultures The course tests the notion that the most effective
way to explore these issues is to become immersed in a
technological environment where unethical behavior as well as
ethical norms can be safely and confidentially tested, evaluated,
observed, and experienced. The course will mix experiential
learning with individual and group interaction with a variety of
technologies.
This course is unique in its construction and in its mix of
technological tools for instruction. Although a vibrant literature is
emerging on approaches to teaching ethics and information
technology and on the use of technology in the classroom,
relatively little is known about learning processes and learning
outcomes in the combination of ethics and emerging social
technologies. The course will, in part, form a test environment for
learning about how to use innovative technological tools to teach
about the ethical dilemmas posed by these same technologies.
Significant instruction takes place with the aid of technological
tools available through an online virtual environment build on the
Sakai platform that most University of Michigan students
recognize as CTools.

In a three-part exercise, students examine a set of photographic
images to which various enhancement algorithms and editorial
techniques have been applied. Working in teams of two to four
individuals, students will then categorize a set of existing
digitized photo images according to a four part rendering scheme
and evaluate the truthfulness of the images within the scheme.
Finally, students will assess how meaningful and trustworthy are
a set of images in an online exhibit by comparing and contrasting
the messages of the image with the messages of the
accompanying text.
Assignment 4: Information Integrity: Collaborative editing roll
playing
Students will be assigned randomly to one of four roles: known
author; anonymous author; known editor; anonymous editor.
Students will play their roles in creating and editing content in a
class-limited wiki. Topics chosen for creation and editing will be
determined by the class. Students will be given explicit
assignments regarding the submission of truthful and untruthful
content and on the “rules of engagement” for adding, editing, and
deleting content. Students will log their activities and seek to
create together a set of trustworthy wiki entries. Discussion
during and after the exercise will explore the challenges of
establishing and keeping trust.
Assignment 5: Secrecy and Openness: Cryptography

7.1 Example: Module Assignments
Assignment 1: Virtual Environments: Anonymity
Students will create an avatar in a virtual world and adopt an
anonymous persona. They will interact with their classmates in a
secure environment over a period of several days, and then
attempt to guess which student each avatar represents. Students
will maintain awareness of such factors as whether they
encountered any challenges in maintaining anonymity on a longterm basis; whether they employed confounding strategies to
actively deter detection; how frustrated they were by others’
anonymity; whether their anonymous status conferred a sense of
freedom to behave transgressively; the extent to which their or
others’ personalities were identifiable through language,
appearance, or gestures, etc. What are some of the unexpected
disadvantages of anonymity in this environment? Apply ethical
theories discussed in class in your analysis.
Assignment 2: Virtual Environments: Cheating
Students play videogames with colleagues: (1) cooperatively as a
member of a team, and (2) competitively in an individual PvP
exercise. (1) Students on each team first must discuss and decide
as a group whether their team will collectively condone and
engage in cheating behaviors in order to advance their progress,
and note the results generated by their decision whether or not to
cheat. Each team also must determine whether they have
identified evidence of cheating by their opponents, and if so, what
their response will be in return. (2) As individual players, students
will be encouraged to cheat in one-on-one interactions in order to
succeed. They must note their emotions, as well as their
intellectual rationalizations, when engaging in transgressive
behavior. Is the game more or less enjoyable when both players
are known to be cheating? Apply ethical theories discussed in
class in your analysis.
Assignment 3: Information Integrity: Critical judgment

The purpose of assignment is to assess the level of knowledge of
the cryptography section of this course. An exam on the topic will
be offered. The exam key will be posted on the CTools site in
advance of the students taking the exam. However, the key will
be posted in an encrypted form. The students will not be told
which encryption scheme was used for encoding. Students will
have the choice of studying for the exam in a traditional way, or
putting their effort towards decrypting the answer key and
guaranteeing full credit on the exam.
Assignment 6: Secrecy and Openness: Role playing
Homework is a role-playing assignment. Students are given a list
of ‘artifacts’ of varying levels of importance to them personally,
and to society in general. Students will then be asked
(individually or in groups) to prioritize artifacts in terms of
importance and need for secrecy. The initial evaluation will be
from their current perspective as a UM student. Next, students
will be randomly assigned a role for role-play. Students will again
be asked to prioritize artifacts and reflect upon any changes in
their prioritization scheme.

8. CONCLUSION
The design and implementation of an innovative course on ethics
and information technology is a somewhat risky undertaking.
First, we do not yet know of the market for the concentration and
the extent to which the new course will both attract students to the
concentration and fulfill critical learning objectives for the new
Informatics Program. Second, we cannot anticipate the extent to
which experiential teaching in the domain of ethics and
information technology will lead to specific learning outcomes.
Toward this end, the course instructors have partnered with the
university’s Center for Research on Learning and Teaching to
develop assessment metrics new student feedback mechanisms.
Third, we are not sure that the course will or should result in
behavioral changes in the students who complete the course. We

believe the risk of failure (measured by either low enrollment or
low student evaluations) is offset by the opportunity to create a
learning environment that serves as a model laboratory for new
research on teaching ethics at the undergraduate level.

9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author offers thanks to David Chesney, College of
Engineering, and Marianne Ryan, School of Information,
University of Michigan, for collaborating in the development of
the course described in this paper. At the University of Michigan,
the Provost’s Multidisciplinary Learning and Team Teaching
initiative and the President’s Ethics in Public Life initiative
provided generous support for planning and start up of the course.

10. REFERENCES
[1] Bynum, T. W. 2004. Ethical challenges to citizens of ‘The
Automatic Age’: Norbert Weiner on the information society.
Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in
Society 2, 2 65-74.
[2] Bynum, T. W. 2006. Flourishing ethics. Ethics and
Information Technology. 8, 2, 157-173.
DOI=10.1007/s10676-006-9107-0
[3] Buchanan, E. and Ess, C. 2005. The ethics of e-games.
International Review of Information Ethics 4 (December), 26.
[4] Capurro, R. 2006. Towards an ontological foundation of
information ethics. Ethics and Information Technology 8, 2,
175-186. DOI=10.1007/s10676-006-9108-0
[5] Chesney, T. 2007. An empirical examination of Wikipedia’s
credibility. First Monday 11 (November).
http://www.firstmondya.org/issues/issue11_11/chesney/inde
x.html
[6] Duranti, L. 1995. Reliability and authenticity: the concepts
and their implications. Archivaria 39, p. 8.
[7] Floridi, L. 1999. Information ethics: on the philosophical
foundations of computer ethics. Ethics and Information
Technology 1, 1, 37-56.
[8] Floridi, L. 2002. On the intrinsic value of information
objects and the infosphere. Ethics and Information
Technology 4, 4, 287-304.
[9] Floridi, L. 2008. Information ethics: its nature and scope, In
Moral Philosophy and Information Technology, J. van den
Hoven and J. Weckert (eds.). Cambridge University Press.

[10] Gibbons, S. 2007. The academic library and the net gen
student: making the connections. Chicago: Amer. Lib.
Assoc..
[11] Himma, K. E. 2007. Foundational issues in information
ethics. Library Hi Tech 25, 1, 79-94.
DOI=10.1108/07378830710735876
[12] Hutchings, P. (ed.). 2002. Ethics of inquiry: issues in the
scholarship of teaching and learning. Menlo Park: Carnegie
Publications.
[13] International Center for Information Ethics.
http://icie.zkm.de/
[14] Introna, L. 2005. Phenomenological approaches to ethics and
information technology. Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethics-itphenomenology/
[15] Lippincott, J. 2005. Net generation students and libraries. In
Educating the net generation. Boulder: EDUCAUSE.
http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/pub7101m.pdf
[16] McRobb, S., Jefferies, P., Stahl, B. C. 2007. Exploring the
relationship between pedagogy, ethics and technology:
building a framework for strategy development. Technology,
Pedagogy & Education 16, 1, 111-126.
DOI=10.1080/14759390601168122
[17] Mitchell, W. J. 2001. The reconfigured eye: visual truth in
the post-photographic era. Cambridge: MIT Press, p 43.
[18] Moor, J. H. 1985. What is computer ethics? In T. W. Bynum,
ed. Computers and Ethics. Basil Blackwell, pp. 266-275.
[19] Moor, J. H. 2005. Why we need better ethics for emerging
technologies. Ethics and Information Technology 7,2, 111119. DOI=10.1007/s10676-006-0008-0
[20] Nye, D. E. 2006 [check pub date]. Technology matters:
questions to live with. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[21] Strauss, W. and Howe, N. 2006. Millennials and the pop
culture. Great Falls, VA: Life Course Assoc.
[22] University of Michigan, Ethics in Public Life Initiative.
http://www.umich.edu/pres/ethics/about/

Ethics and Social Justice in Undergraduate Informatics
Education
Lynette Kvasny
Pennsylvania State University
329C IST Building
University Park, PA 16802
814-865-6458

lkvasny@ist.psu.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper examines social justice as a praxis oriented approach
for infusing ethics and multiculturalism in undergraduate
informatics education. Social Justice education includes an
interdisciplinary study of information and communication
technologies (ICT) that analyzes unequal power relations that
exist in society, and a set of interactive, experiential pedagogical
principles that help students understand the meaning of social
difference in their personal lives, in their professional lives, and in
their civic lives. The paper summarizes the theoretical basis of
social justice and its relationship to ethics, multiculturalism and
ICT. The paper also presents a pedagogical approach used in the
design and implement of an existing undergraduate informatics
course. Social justice education has the potential to prepare
students who are (1) able to critically evaluate the intended and
unintended consequences of ICT adoption and use, (2)
sophisticated in their understanding of social institutions in
shaping the meaning and intended uses of ICT, and (3) able to
work with diverse others.

Topics
Information policy, ethics and law

Keywords
undergraduate education, ethics, social justice, pedagogy

1. INTRODUCTION
ICTs provide new and exciting ways for people to work,
coordinate schedules, share information, maintain relationships
and seek entertainment. In this paper, the information and the
technologies that are employed by humans to create, organize,
transfer and utilize that information in a networked environment
are collectively known as “the information environment”. This
information environment is changing the ways in which we
Copyright and Disclaimer Information

interact, communicate, and function on the job and in our daily
lives. Emerging technologies also raise new economic, cultural,
legal, ethical, and social issues that are of grave importance to
society.
The College of Information Sciences and Technology (IST) at the
Pennsylvania State University offers an existing course, IST431:
The Information Environment, which surveys these diverse issues.
This course examines how and why the evolving information
environment influences the design, development and use of ICT.
This course also examines the social impacts of ICT on people,
organizations, and societies.
The information environment is a messy. The issues are not
clearly identified, there are competing interests, and solutions are
extremely difficult to develop because there is no one, best
answer to the problem. To assist students in developing the skills
necessary for coping with this situation, the course employs a
social justice approach to education. The subject matter of the
course is learned through a series of problems that enable students
to learn about the layers of the information environment and the
factors embedded in them. The learning format emphasizes a
student-centered classroom activities and team-based projects that
feature participation, inclusiveness, affirmation of human agency,
social responsibility, and collaborative work in small groups.
Through individual and group learning activities, students and the
educator examine the influence of environmental factors on ICT
and the impact of ICT on the environment. This paper
summarizes the primary theoretical and pedagogical features of
this course and the broader implications of social justice
pedagogies for educators.

2. THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
According to Adams, Bell and Giffin [1], social justice education
seeks the full and equal participation of all groups in a society.
This is a vision of society in which diverse social groups mutually
shaped ICT to meet their needs. In such a society, individuals are
both self-determining (able to develop their full capabilities) and
interdependent (capable of interacting democratically with
others). Students should have both a sense of social responsibility
as well as a sense of their own agency to speak and act in a
manner that supports their beliefs.
Social justice education is also praxis oriented [2]. Praxis posits
that theory and practice are interwoven, with practice being
shaped by informal and formal, tacit and explicit theories. Hence,
the way that we identify and articulate problems that exist in the
information environment, the solutions that we entertain as viable,

and the methods that we choose as appropriate for realizing those
solutions are all theoretical as well as practical questions [1].
Consequently, theory serves three important functions. First,
theory enables us to reflect critically upon our intentions,
decision-making, and the means we use to actualize our choices in
the design of ICT. Computerized information systems, for
instance, are generally designed for some idealized audience.
Ethical problems surface when users with different knowledge
requirements attempt to use the system. Hoesle [3] notes that
computerized information system use requires people to act and
think in prescribed ways that privilege Western cultural traditions
while marginalizing the cultural traditions of others. Third-world
cultures have unique forms of knowledge embodied in cultural
artifacts such as mythologies, storytelling, proverbs, art and
dance. While these forms of knowledge are legitimate and deserve
to be preserved, Hoesle [3] posits that they cannot be equally
well-represented through computerized ways of storing,
representing and transmitting knowledge. In the 15 years since
Hoesle authored this manuscript, ICT has advanced significantly.
With Web 2.0 technologies, relatively low skilled users can
author content in a variety of social media formats such as video,
podcasts, wikis, and blogs. With these diverse formats, users now
have more options for representing their unique worldview, and
Hoesle’s concern may be less salient. The challenge may be less a
problem of inadequacies in computerized representations of
knowledge, and more a problem of providing access to the tools
and competencies that make self authoring possible. Open source
applications provide lower cost technology solutions to
organizations and individuals seeking alternatives to proprietary
information systems. Both Web 2.0 and open source are based on
community-oriented design intentions and choices, and expand
the usage options for non-traditional users of ICT.
Second, theory has the potential to help us stay conscious of our
position as historical subjects. Ethical implications arise from
these historically situated power relations. For instance, ICT is
often seen as an essential component of development and
democratic practices. This viewpoint is expressed in the context
of developing countries and historically underserved groups in the
developed world. These groups are seen as excluded from the
information society, and, consequently, should apply ICT or risk
being left behind. This line of reasoning not only supports the
technology imperative, but also subscribes to a development
ideology that is based on a concept of history as linear and
universal. All societies and people go through the same stages
until they reach the same economic levels as countries and people
considered developed [4]. The assumption is that ICT is neutral
and nondiscriminatory in that it potentially provides equal
opportunities to everyone; equal access to ICT ensures equal
benefits. However, this ignores historical power relations such as
colonialism, racism, and sexism to which ICT is inextricably
linked. The perception that ICTs are necessary for development
also ignores that technology invents its own needs such as
software and hardware upgrades and training [5], as well as
problems such as the environmental degradation that results from
a Western lifestyle. Ecologically, it is impossible for the whole
world to adopt a Western lifestyle [3]. Yet a Western lifestyle is
offered as the standard for development.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, theory provides a
framework for interrogating our practices and creating novel

approaches to addressing issues in the information environment.
Many of these issues, such as social and digital exclusion
[6][7][8], privacy [9][10][11], and community and democracy
[12][13], have strong ethical and multicultural implications. For
instance, the digital divide is at least as much about cultural
differences as it may be about disparities in income and
infrastructure. Because the internet enables users to focus solely
on receiving information from and communicating with likeminded individuals, Paterson [4] worries that the internet may
foster fragmented existences that exacerbate existing social
differences based on ethnicity, gender, geography, age and race.
The central implication underlying these issues of ethics and
multiculturalism is how diverse people in different parts of the
world experience the effects of the computerization. For some, the
challenge is to continuously innovate and create new
technologies, others grapple to keep up with the continuous
changes enabled by ICT, and still others struggle to put in place
the basic infrastructure that may allow them to participate in the
global, knowledge-based society.
Praxis forces us to examine how power operates through
normalizing discourses about ICT and power relations. Praxis
reminds us to continually ask “in whose interest” prevailing
systems operate [1]. The question of who is served by ICT
provides a useful analytic tool for exposing hierarchical
relationships, as well as the hidden advantages and penalties
embedded in technologies that are purportedly neutral. A
commitment to social justice requires an ethical attitude towards
inclusion of diverse cultures and the potential of ICT to improve
the capacity of human agents to transform their world.

3. COURSE DESIGN
The social justice approach evolved over five years of teaching
and continuously improving The Information Environment course.
The context in which the course is situated as well as the
pedagogical mechanisms that were used in the evolution of the
course are presented.

3.1 Context
The College of IST prepares undergraduate students to confront
and manage the complex interactions among technology, people,
and information. Students are broadly trained in the areas of
software engineering and networking, user interface design,
information systems development, human-computer interaction,
and social informatics. Our curriculum integrates these areas
through problem-based learning, often with industry-based
collaborators. Students emerge from our program with a systems
view of ICT, experience working in teams on unstructured
problems, and an understanding of the contextual factors (from
the technology itself to cognition, ethics, economics, and policy)
that shape the design, adoption and use of ICT. In 2007, over 90%
of our graduates were placed in technology-oriented career
positions in diverse industries such as consulting, banking,
manufacturing, healthcare and government.
Given the industry orientation of the IST curriculum and my
professional experience and graduate education in information
systems at an American business school, the initial design of the
course focused primarily on professional ethics. Using the ACM
and IEEE Codes of Professional Ethics as a basis, students were

grouped in teams and presented with fictitious scenarios that
portrayed ethical dilemmas that they may face in their careers.
The scenarios included breaches in the confidentiality of
information, programmers’ and analysts’ obligation to act in a
socially responsible manner, use of company computers for
personal benefit, ownership of intellectual property, and
electronic monitoring of workers. While the scenarios generated
good discussion, students didn’t seem to internalize the material.
A second approach was to replace the fictitious scenarios with
real-world cases from the popular press. Student teams were
asked to evaluate and debate the behaviors of the various
stakeholders presented in the cases. Again, most students failed to
personalize the ethical issues
To obtain insights as to how I could improve the course, I
instituted a student quality team. In our college, student quality
teams assess the classroom learning environment and provide
educators with feedback to help them improve course design. The
student quality team program is student-organized and managed.
Team leaders are trained in quality principles, team management,
survey design, and diplomacy. They also receive nominal salaries.
Team members are recruited from students enrolled in the course,
and they receive one credit of independent study for their effort.
Students noted that the scenarios seemed abstract and removed
from their daily lived experiences. They had little formal
experience working in a business organization. Consequently,
they had yet to develop a strong professional identity. Also,
because ethics was isolated in a course module and presented
solely as a professional concern, the importance of ethical
considerations was minimized.
While considering the student feedback, I attended the
Multicultural Teaching Academy at the Schreyer Institute for
Teaching Excellence at the Pennsylvania State University. Social
justice was presented as an approach for infusing multiculturalism
and ethics in undergraduate education. Social justice also fit with
my research interests in ICT and social exclusion, and personal
commitment to improving the recruitment, retention and academic
excellence for women, students of color and international students
who are severely under-represented in our program. Hence, social
justice formed the basis for the third iteration.

3.2 Pedagogical Approach
A pedagogy respectful of social justice and human diversity
begins with the educator’s sense of social responsibility [14].
Education is fundamentally ethical and political in nature. Ethics
and politics are inherent in the teacher-student relationship, in the
physical conditions of the classroom, in the grading, and in the
readings and course content that are chosen or excluded from the
syllabus.
To achieve a democratic learning environment that is inclusive
and meaningful to students, the first day of class begins with the
educator presenting an overview of the course and the key
learning objectives. These learning objectives include:
•

identify major themes in information policy studies (e.g.
ethics, privacy, workplace monitoring, security) and relate
these themes to the applications of ICTs

•

use conceptual frameworks to frame analysis of ICTs in their
context of use, at varying levels of analysis (e.g. individual,

organizational, societal, global) reflected in the information
environment
•

analyze the impacts of information systems and technology,
and make appropriate policy recommendations

Students are then broken into teams and asked to identity three
important topics that they would like to explore. The class then
organizes the topics into themes that are then incorporated into
the syllabus. Table 1 provides an example of topics that were
explored during the Spring 2007 semester.
Modules
Theories of technology
and social change
Technology and
consumerism

Sample Topics
technology determinism, social
determinism, social informatics
sign value, use value, media
consolidation, consumption,
technology fetish, identity, data
warehousing, personalization
Technology and the body
reproductive technologies,
genetic testing, cloning
Technology and
social media, digital divide,
communities
online gaming communities,
community wi-fi
Technology and deviant
cyberstalking, identity theft,
social behavior
sexual predators, virtual rape
Technology and work
electronic monitoring, global
workforce, deskilling /
upskilling
Table 1: Learning Module
In addition to inclusiveness, the educator seeks to leverage the
cultural diversity that exists in the classroom. Being socialized
and living in the dominant culture often lessens our awareness
that our beliefs and behaviors reflect a particular racial, ethnic, or
gender affiliation. According to Wlodkowski and Ginsberg [15],
white males have a more difficult time acknowledging the idea
that Anglo-Americans and Western norms enjoy a privileged
position in the United States’ educational system. Culture is
taught and understood implicitly, which is why it is difficult to
explicitly describe who we are culturally. Consequently, we are
more likely to experience uniqueness of our own culture when we
are in the presence of those who are different from ourselves.
Since, on average, 85% of the students enrolled in the course are
white males, the challenge is to exploit the cultural diversity that
exists within this group.
For example, students vary in their political affiliation. The social
media learning activity exploits this difference by asking students
to compare and contrast the use of You Tube, Facebook and other
social media applications by 2008 presidential candidates. To help
students understand how gender mediates social interactions, male
students create female avatars and interact with others in a virtual
world. They then report on their experiences. In the assignment
on digital divide and internet indispensability, students keep
journals on their internet use for a 24 hour period. They then
reflect on the benefits of their use as well as the losses they may
have suffered if they lacked internet access. After they complete
this assignment, I ask students to collect statistics about ICT
diffusion and other e-Readiness indicators for a developing
country of their choice and compare these to comparable
indicators for the US. Students are often astounded by the
disparities that they uncover, and in some cases express a deeper
appreciation for the privileges that they derive from internet

access. A few students are highly motivated by this exercise and
extend this work for their semester long research project. These
students conduct an experiment in which they give up their cell
phones on for a weekend and reflect on this experience as a
means of experiencing life as a “have not”. Students consistently
note extreme difficulty in coordinating schedules with friends,
missing important phone calls from employers, the loss of social
status that comes from cell phone ownership, and the loss of
social connectedness that results from the inability to
communicate with friends anytime / anywhere. One student
recounted how he often provides technical support to his friends.
During the weekend when he turned off his mobile phone, he
missing a late night call from a frantic friend who experienced a
computer problem while writing up a term paper that was due the
following morning. As a result, the student was faced with the
tough task of repairing his relationship with his friend.
There are a number of procedures used for classwork and
assignments. Peer teaching is used in nearly every class. Students
sign up to deliver individual presentations that correspond to the
topics that will be discussed during the semester. In these
presentations, students find current news articles, interesting
websites, YouTube videos or other media related to the topic that
they chose. Each presentation ends with a class discussion in
response to two probing questions developed by the presenter.
Through this exercise, each student acts as a teacher for the group.
Additional procedures include group writing using wikis,
journaling using blogs, small research projects such as examining
privacy and identity using Facebook profiles, deconstructing
advertisements for technology-related products, and using
discussion forums to generate insights about characteristics of
members of online gaming communities. Team-based research
projects are the main way for students to demonstrate in-depth
learning experience with humans and ICTs. Through these
procedures, students are engaged in critical questioning, problem
posing, and research that enable them to utilize their strengths,
experiences, and values to deepen understanding of social,
political, cultural and ethical issues that exist in the information
environment.

4. IMPLICATIONS FOR EDUCATORS
The social justice approach has several implications for educators.
First, educators have to address two sources of power asymmetry
in the classroom – (1) the educator’s institutional power, status
and authority, and (2) the educator’s social status characteristics
such as race, gender, age and nationality. As an African-American
woman teaching undergraduate courses to a predominantly white
male student population, there are clearly many ways in which the
educator and students are not alike. The challenge is to foster a
classroom environment in which the educator’s authority and
expertise is clarified and made explicit because it bears on
grading, evaluation, and classroom norms. Omolade [16] argues
that “authority with, not authority over” is complicated by social
status differences between the students and the educator. Female
educators of color must maintain democratic structures to foster
authority with students. Once this mutual respect is established,
students will accept greater responsibility for establishing an
active and engaged learning environment.
Second, the instructor must create a safe environment that
encourages discussion. Silence in the classroom can result from a
number of factors including fear of being patronized, anger,

anxiety, hostility, ignorance, or resistance to being forced to
speak. For hooks [17] silence is not always about the failure to
make an utterance. Sometimes, silence is the fear of being unable
to make a speech that compels others to listen. Silence can be the
fear of not being heard. Educators can use their classroom
authority to create a safe classroom environment that compels
students to value their own voice by establishing classroom norms
to ensure respect and the amicable resolution of conflicts.
Technologies such as message boards where students can post
comments and pointers to relevant information provide another
means by which students can participate in the course.
Finally, educators must enable students to understand that the
power relations that exist in society are not the natural order of
things. The privileges that we enjoy in life are the result of
historically constructed forces which can be changed. As future
information technology professionals, students can use the
political influence, resources and human agency to create and
implement ICTs that are socially just, environmentally benign,
and enable positive social change.

5. CONCLUSION
Social justice provides a useful approach for infusing ethics and
multiculturalism in undergraduate informatics education. A social
justice pedagogy for the study of ICT and its social implications
would necessarily include teaching that pays attention to personal
safety and classroom norms, begins from students’ worldview,
and uses students experiences as a basis for course content and
problem-posing. This student-centered approach is vastly
different than the traditional lecture-discussion-testing mode of
higher education that has existed for centuries, and requires a shift
in the power relations between students and educators. Educators
seeking to adopt a social justice approach may do so in
incremental steps by experimenting with different assignments
and classroom activities, and by fostering a classroom atmosphere
that invites everyone to speak from their own voice of experience,
take risks, and learn from their mistakes. Social justice education
has the potential to prepare students who are (1) able to critically
evaluate the intended and unintended consequences of ICT
adoption and use, (2) sophisticated in their understanding of
social institutions in shaping the meaning and intended uses of
ICT, and (3) able to work with diverse others.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Adams, M., Bell, L.A., and Giffin, P. 1997. Teaching for
diversity and social justice: A sourcebook. Routledge, NY.
[2] Friere, P. 1970. Pedagogy of the oppressed. Seabury, NY.
[3] Hoesle, V. 1992. The third world as a philosophical problem.
Social Research, 59, 227-263.
[4] Paterson, B. 2007. We cannot eat data: The need for
computer ethics to address the cultural and ecological
impacts of computing. In Information technology ethics:
Cultural perspectives, Hongladadrom, S. and Ess, C. (eds.),
Idea Group Reference, Hershey, PA, 153-168.
[5] Mbarika, V., Payton, F., Kvasny, L. and Amadi, A. 2007. IT
education and workforce participation: A new era for women
in Kenya? The Information Society, 23, 1, 1-18.

[6] Hacker, K. and Mason, S. 2003. Ethical gaps in studies of
the digital divide. Ethics and Information Technology, 5, 2,
99-115.

[12] Johnson, D. 1997. Is the global information infrastructure a
democratic technology? ACM Computers and Society, 27.
20-26.

[7] Kvasny, L. 2006. Let the sisters speak: Understanding
information technology from the standpoint of the 'other'.
The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems, 37,
4, 13-25

[13] Winner, L. 1997. Cyberlibertarian myths and the prospect for
community. ACM Computers and Society 27, 14-19.

[8] Tavani, H.T. 2004. Ethical reflection on the digital divide.
Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in
Society, 1, 2, 99-108.

[15] Wlodkowski, R. and Ginsberg, M. 1995. Diversity and
Motivation: Culturally Responsive Teaching, Jossey-Bass
Punlishers, San Francisco, CA.

[9] Ess, C. 2005. Lost in Translation? Intercultural dialogues on
privacy and information ethics. Ethics and Information
Technology, 7, 1, 1-6.

[16] Omolade, B. 1987. A black feminist pedagogy. Women’s
Studies Quarterly, 15, 3 & 4, 32-39.

[10] Westin, A. 2003. Social and political dimensions of privacy.
Journal of Social Issues, 59, 2, 431-453.
[11] Capuroor, R. 2005 Privacy: An intercultural perspective.
Ethics and Information Technology, 7, 1, 37-47.

[14] Giroux, H. 1992. Border Crossings: Cultural Workers and
the Politics of Education. Routledge and Kegan Paul, NY.

[17] hooks, b. 1994. Teaching to transgress: Education as the
practice of freedom. Routlege, NY.

